Isolation of lignans glycosides from Alibertia sessilis (Vell.) K. Schum. (Rubiaceae) by preparative high-performance liquid chromatography
Enantiomeric aglycone lignans contained in a mixture were separated from a fraction of the extract of the stems of Alibertia sessilis (Vell.) K. Schum. (Rubiaceae) by preparative high-performance liquid chromatography. An efficient and fast separation can be achieved with methanol-water (30:70, v/v). Their structures were identified as (+)-lyoniresinol 3α-O-β-glucopyranoside and (-)lyoniresinol 3α-O-β-glucopyranoside, being reported for the first time in Rubiaceae.

IntroductionRubiaceae is widely distributed in Brazilian main ecosystems (Amazon, Cerrado and Atlantic Forest). This family is well known due to economic and therapeutic importance of these species, specially Coffea arabica and Cinchona ledgeriana [1][2]. Reported chemical constituents of Rubiaceae revealed a great diversity of secondary metabolites such as iridoids, alkaloids, anthraquinones, flavonoids, phenolics derivatives, triterpenes and diterpenes [1].Few chemical studies of Alibertia have been reported resulting in the isolation of several triterpenes [2][3][4], iridoids [5], flavonoids [6] and caffeic acid esters [2].Alibertia sessilis (Vell.) K. Schum., popularly known as "marmelada-de-cachorro", is distributed in the states of Ceará, Mato Grosso, Goiás and Minas Gerais. The plant possesses fruits with succulent pulp, black when ripe, which are consumed by birds in general [7].From the stems of A. sessilis we report the isolation of a mixture of lignan glycosides. The separation of (+)-lyoniresinol 3α-O-β-glucopyranoside (1) and (-)-lyoniresinol 3α-O-βglucopyranoside (2) by conventional methods such as silica gel and RP18 low pressure column chromatography was unsuccessful. However, it was quite easy and fast to purify each compound by preparative high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC). Reversed-phase HPLC is commonly used for the separation of compounds present in complex mixtures of plant extracts [8][9].Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) analysis was used to identify the compounds. Compound 1 exhibit antioxidant [10] and antitumor-promoting activities [11]. These compounds, whose chemical structures are given in Figure 1, are being reported for the first time in Rubiaceae.
Experimental details
Plant materialAlibertia sessilis (Vell.) K. Schum. (Rubiaceae) was collected in the Estação Ecológica Experimental de Mogi-Guaçu, São Paulo State, Brazil in November 2003. A voucher specimen was deposited at the Herbário do Instituto Botânico da Secretaria do Meio Ambiente de São Paulo (nº SP 370.914).
ApparatusThe high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) (Shimadzu, Japan) equipment used was a CLASS-VP Ver.5.41 system comprised a Shimadzu SPD10Avp UV detector, a Shimadzu LC-8ATvp Multisolvent Delivery System, a Shimadzu SCL-10Avp controller, a Shimadzu LC pump, a Degasser Shimadzu DGU-14A and a CLASS-VP Ver.5.41 workstation (Shimadzu, Japan). HPLC-grade methanol was purchased from J.T. Baker (Baker-Mallinckrodt, Phillipsburg, NJ, USA). HPLC-grade water (18 MΩ cm) was obtained using a Millipore Milli-Q purification system (Millipore Co., Bedford, MA, USA).
Extraction, fractionation and preparation of sampleDried and powered stems (50.0 g) of A. sessilis were successively extracted with ethanol at room temperature. The solvent was removed under reduced pressure yielding 3.7 g of crude extract. This extract was dissolved in methanolwater (80:20, v/v) and partitioned with hexane, ethyl acetate and n-butanol to yield 0.5 g of hexane extract, 1.4 g of ethyl acetate extract and 1.3 g of n-butanol extract after evaporated to dryness under reduced pressure.The ethyl acetate extract was submitted to column chromatography using Sephadex LH-20.The column was eluted with methanol, to give 15 fractions reunited after thin layer chromatography (TLC) analysis. Fractions 2-3 (146.4 mg) were subjected to chromatography on a RP18 column using a water-methanol gradient system affording iridoid geniposidic acid (11.8 mg), a derivative fenolic glycoside (6.7 mg) not yet identified and the mixture of lignans glycosides (36.6 mg).
Separation procedureThe separation of lignans was performed using a Phenomenex Luna RP18 (2) column (250 x 21.20 mm I.D. x 10 µm, Torrance, CA, USA) in a Rheodyne 7125 sample injector with a 2.0 mL sample loop (Rheodyne, Cotati, CA, USA). The mobile phase composed of methanol-water (30:70, v/v, isocratic system) was eluted using a flow-rate of 10.0 mL min -1 , the injection volume was 1.0 mL. Pure lignans were examined by HPLC on an analytical column. The analysis was performed with a Phenomenex Luna RP18 (2) column (250 x 4.6 mm I.D. x 5 µm, Torrance, CA, USA) in a Rheodyne 7125 sample injector with a 20 µL sample loop (Rheodyne, Cotati, CA, USA). The mobile phase composed of methanol-water (30:70, v/v, isocratic system) was eluted at a flowrate of 1.0 mL min -1 , the injection volume was 20 µL. For both preparative and analytical HPLC, the detector was set as 238 nm.
Structural identification of the compoundsThe NMR spectra in CD 3 OD of all compounds were obtained using a Varian, INOVA 500 spectrometer (Varian, Palo Alto, CA, USA), operating at 500 MHz for 1 H and 125 MHz for 13 C, two-dimensional technique such as gCOSY (gradient chemical shift correlation spectroscopy), gHMQC (gradient heteronuclear multiple quantum coherence) and gHMBC (gradient heteronuclear 
Results and DiscussionThe crude extract from stems of A. sessilis was partitioned using hexane, ethyl acetate and n-butanol. The ethyl acetate extract afforded geniposidic acid, a derivative fenolic glycoside and a third compound. The 1 H-and 13 C-NMR data for this last showed overlapping signals, suggesting that third compound could be a diastereomeric mixture of lignans containing enantiomeric aglycone parts that were not separated. Conventional methods such as silica gel and RP18 low pressure column chromatography were not successful to separate this lignans.So, this partially purified sample was analysed by HPLC and a series of experiments was performed to determine the optimal solvent system for the HPLC separation. The following systems were tested: methanol-water (35:65, 30:70, 25:75, v/v), and the separation time were: 18 min, 25 min and 42 min, respectively, for an analytical separation run. But, despite of first system has faster separation time, the peaks concerning to lignans didn't have good separation, and the third system had a long separation time. A good and fast separation can be achieved with the system methanol-water (30:70, v/v).Another evidence that the mixture was composed of a enantiomeric aglycone parts is the identical UV spectras with absorption maximum at 215 and 270 nm and one spot when analysed by TLC.The result obtained from the partially purified sample of Alibertia sessilis by preparative HPLC is showed in Fig. 2.  anomeric configuration [13]. The peak 1 fraction was identified as (+)-lyoniresinol 3α-O-β-glucopyranoside (1) and the peak 2 fraction as (-)lyoniresinol 3α-O-β-glucopyranoside (2).
ConclusionsReversed-phase HPLC was successful in the preparative separation of a mixture containing enantiomeric aglycone parts, it was easy and fast to purify each compound of the mixture. So, this study contributed significantly to improve the knowledge about secondary metabolites of more one species of Brazilian Cerrado, when these compounds are being reported for the first time in Rubiaceae.Figure 1 .1Figure 1. Lignans glucosides isolated from the stems of Alibertia sessilis.
Figure 2 .2Figure 2. Preparative HPLC chromatogram of the partially purified sample of Alibertia sessilis. Column: Phenomenex Luna RP18 (2) column (250 x 21.20 mm I.D. x 10 µm); mobile phase: methanol-water (30:70, v/v); flow-rate: 10.0 mL min -1 ; monitoring at 238 nm. Peak 1: (+)-lyoniresinol 3α-O-β-glucopyranoside. Peak 2: (-)-lyoniresinol 3α-O-β-glucopyranoside.
Figure 3 .3Figure 3. Analytical HPLC chromatogram of the partially purified sample of Alibertia sessilis and the compounds isolated. Column: Phenomenex Luna RP18 (2) column (250 x 4.6 mm I.D. x 5 µm); mobile phase: methanol-water (30:70, v/v); flow-rate: 1.0 mL min -1 ; monitoring at 238 nm. Peak at t R = 13.766 min: (+)-lyoniresinol 3α-O-β-glucopyranoside 1. Peak at t R = 15.361 min: (-)-lyoniresinol 3α-O-β-glucopyranoside 2.
