
must thus be represented by one of the two formulae which can be constructed through linkage of 1 and 7 Although 8 IS preferred on account of Its sltghtly greater structural resemblance to guianin (2), and the canellins A (3) and C (4) biogenetitally both 8 and 9 are equally probable (Scheme) and no argument is presently available by which 9 can be excluded. This is due to the fact that the aryl group occupies the endoface of the molecule and thus, in contradistinction to the aryl group of the canellms (3, 4), does not help in the discrimination of the methoxyls through differential shielding. Evidence for the endo-arrangement was seen in the fact that the hydroxyl at C-8 of macrophyllin is as completely acetylated at room temp. as that of guianin (2) while under identical conditions only monoacetates are formed from the canellms A (3) and C (4).' In these cases, esterification of the hydroxyl at C-8 is incomplete, even at 60", due, conceivably, to the steric hindrance exerted by the exo-aryl group. The trans-relationship of the arylmethyl substituents, as shown in the relative spatial representations of macrophyllm ( 8 -8-hydroxy-1.5~dlmethoxy-7-methyW(or 2)-oxo-6-(3',4'-methylenedioxy-5'-methoxyphenyl)-blcyclo [3,2,1]oct-2(or it)-ene Abstract-The trunk wood of L~ar~a macrophylla (A C Smith) Kosterm (Lauraceae) contains, m addition to sltosterol, terpene (borneol) and sesqulterpene (nerohdol, elemol) alcohols, a novel neohgnan, macrophyllm, for which the structure of 3-allyl-8-hydroxy-l,5-dlmethoxy-7-methyl-4(or 2)-oxo-6-(3'.4'-methylenedloxy-5'-methoxyphenyl)-blcyclo [3,2,1] act-2(or 4)-ene 1s proposed Licar~ rnacrophylla (A. C. Smith) Kosterm. is a tree which grows in the Amazon region. The trunk wood yielded borneol, nerohdol, elemol, sltosterol and a new compound, Cz2Hz607, designated macrophyllm. Functional analysis, warranting expansion of the formula to Cl ,H, 4O . OH(OMe), . 02CHz. suggested this to be a bis-C, . C,-denvatlve. One of the C, . C,-moieties must have structure 1, since the MS indicates cleavage of the molecular ion into a fragment, m/e 192 (go%), which, m analogy with the predominant fragment ions of related bwC, . C3-compounds, such as gulanin (2),2 canellin-A (3)' and canellm-C (4),' must be represented by 5. The PMR spectrum contams all the required proton signals and shows that the two aromatlc protons are meta related. It 1s blogenetltally improbable that they are situated at the alternative meta-positions, because this would require the &-side chain to occupy the para-position to an unoxygenated carbon. The structure of the additional &-moiety can be deduced from the remaining PMR signals. These reveal the existence of the three C,-sequences represented m6. The secondary nature of the carbmol 1s documented by the large paramagnetlc shift of the oxymethine PMR singlet at T 5 80 which accompanies acetylation of macrophyllin (A 1.35 ppm). In addition, this reaction produces virtually ldentlcal (A 0.08 and 009 ppm) diamagnetic * Part 27 m the series "The Chemistry of BrazIlian Lauraceae" For Part 26 see Ref 1 Taken from part of the M SC thesis submitted by J G S M to the Umversldade Federal Rural do Rio de Janeiro (I 973) Sponsored by Mmlstirlo do PIaneJamento (Flnancladora de Estudos e ProJetos S A ) and AssoclaCHo Braslleira da Indlstria FarmacCutlca through Academia Brasdetra de ClCnclas ' GILSBKLCHT, A M , FKANCA, N C, GOTTLILB, 0 R and ROCHA, A I d,t (1974) Phytoch~m~bti y 13, 2285 ' BULOW, M V VON, FRANCA, N C, GOTTLIEB, 0 R and PUENTES SUAREZ,A M (1973) Phytochrmlstry 12, 1805 2839 shifts of the singlets at T 6.53 and 6 68 attributed to ahphattc methoxyls. These must thus occupy symmetrical postttons wrth respect to the carbmol, and, no addttronal oxymethme signals being observable, not even in the spectrum of tetrahydromacrophyllm. be placed on non-protonated sp3-carbons. The r&unsaturated carbonyl, whose presence can be mferred through the IR spectrum (vnl.Ix 1685 cm-I), has a single hydrogen. most probably at the /IS-carbon srnce the corresponding PMR singlet occurs at relatively low field (T 3 1.5) The r-carbon must be occupied by the ally1 group The appearance of the CE12 doublet at relattvely low field (T 6.94, J 7.0 Hz) can be rattonalized only if the methylene group 1s flanked by an addttronal double bond Accordmgly. there IS only one way m which the C,carbmohc proton of the resulting unit 7 must he over the ring. Saturation of the cychc double bond (as m tetrahydromacrophyllm), depriving tt of anisotropic protection, results m a consrderable paramagnettc shaft (A 0.20 ppm) of the corresponding smglet. Macrophyllm
SCHEME I PROBABLEBIOGENETICPATHWAYTOMACROI'HYLLIN
