Optimisation of conditions for the extraction of casearins from Casearia sylvestris using response surface methodology
Optimal conditions for the extraction of casearins from Casearia sylvestris were determined using response surface methodology. The maceration and sonication extraction techniques were performed using a 3 × 3 × 3 full factorial design including three acidity conditions, three solvents of different polarities and three extraction times. The yields and selectivities of the extraction of casearins were significantly influenced by acidity conditions. Taking into account all variables tested, the optimal conditions for maceration extraction were estimated to involve treatment with dichloromethane saturated with ammonium hydroxide for 26 h. Similar yields and selectivities for casearins were determined for sonication extraction using the same solvent but for the much shorter time of 1 h. The best results for stabilisation of the fresh plant material were obtained using leaves that had been oven dried at 40°C for 48 h.

INTRODUCTIONCasearia sylvestris is a medicinal plant native to Brazil, Peru, Argentina, Uruguay and Bolivia, where it is known as guaçatonga. The leaves of the plant are popularly used as an antiseptic, a topical anaesthetic and an anti-ulcer agent, and also to heal skin wound diseases (Scavone et al., 1979;Basile et al., 1990). Some of these properties were supported by the studies of Borges et al. (2000Borges et al. ( , 2001)), who demonstrated the inhibition of phospholipase A 2 by aqueous extracts of the leaves of C. sylvestris. Furthermore, these aqueous extracts were also able to neutralise proteases from snake venoms. A fraction obtained from the dichloromethane:methanol extract of leaves of the plant was active against Bacillus cereus (Alves et al., 2000), and an ethanolic extract showed anti-ulcerogenic activity and low toxicity (Basile et al., 1990). The anti-ulcerogenic property was further investigated and confirmed by Sertié et al. (2000).Phytochemical investigation of C. sylvestris led to the isolation of clerodane diterpene classes, the casearins and casearvestrins (Fig. 1), identified as potential antitumour agents (Itokawa et al., 1990;Morita et al., 1991;Carvalho et al., 1998;Oberlies et al., 2002). Some of the casearins also exhibited DNA-damaging activity as determined by bioassays involving mutant strains of the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae (Carvalho et al., 1998). In these studies, casearins were obtained from the n-hexane fraction of the ethanolic extract (Itokawa et al., 1990;Morita et al., 1991) or from the dichloromethane:methanol (2:1, v/v) extract (Carvalho et al., 1998) of the leaves, whilst casearvestrins were obtained from the methanolic extract of the leaves (Oberlies et al., 2002).The efficiency of extraction of the bioactive components from the medicinal herb is clearly of fundamental importance if the therapeutic properties of this phytomedicine are to be exploited. The present paper deals with the optimisation of different conditions for the maceration and sonication extraction of casearins from leaves of C. sylvestris using response surface methodology, and an evaluation of the stabilisation procedures to be employed with respect to the plant material harvested. Response surface methodology has previously been used to optimise extraction procedures for secondary metabolites from several plants (Costa and Faria, 1998;Del Valle et al., 2000;Liu et al., 2000;Moldão-Martins et al., 2000;Jones et al., 2001).  SP, Brazil). The collected leaves were bulked, oven dried at 40°C for 24 h, finely ground and stored at 25°C until required for experiments designed to determine the optimal conditions for the extraction of the collected materials. The experimental stabilisation procedures were performed with leaves collected in the University Campus in Araraquara. The fresh leaves were immediately submitted to the different stabilisation procedures.
EXPERIMENTALAll solvents used in the experimental procedures had been glass distilled. For chromatographic analyses, HPLC-grade solvents (J. T. Baker, Xalostoc, Mexico) were employed. Water was purified immediately prior to use with a Milli Q plus system (Millipore, Milford, MA, USA).Experimental design and statistical analysis. Experiments were conducted in order to evaluate a range of extraction times (12, 24 and 36 h for maceration and 0.5, 1.0 and 1.5 h for sonication), and solvent polarities (hexane, dichloromethane, methanol and water) at three acidity conditions (pure solvent, solvent saturated with formic acid and solvent saturated with ammonium hydroxide), in a 3 × 3 × 3 full factorial design. The values of the variables of the study were coded in order to assist with the construction of the experimental design, to remove factorial units, to adjust variable axes to intermediate values, and to define a new scale (Table 1). These coded values enabled facile computational manipulation, and increased accuracy in all estimated coefficients (Taqueda et al., 1998). The quadratic response surfaces were estimated by least-square regression. The predicted optimal values for the independent variables were determined from the estimated surface at the maximum stationary point. Analysis of variance (ANOVA) was used to determine the statistical significance of the fitted surface. Additionally, the best extraction condition was tested experimentally, and estimated and experimental values were compared in order to evaluate the accuracy of the response surface.Extraction protocol and sample clean-up. Dried and ground leaves of C. sylvestris (0.400 g) were extracted by maceration or sonication with 6.0 mL of solvent in a centrifuge tube. Samples were centrifuged in a CELM (Barueri-SP, Brazil) instrument at 1200 g for 10 min. An aliquot (1.5 mL) of the supernatant was evaporated to dryness and weighed in order to determine the yield of crude extract. This extract was then dissolved in 1.0 mL of methanol:water (98:2, v/v) and submitted to further clean-up by solid-phase extraction (SPE). Laboratory-prepared SPE-C18 columns (20 × 9 mm i.d.), dry packed with 1.5 g of LiChroprep ® RP18 (40-63 µm; Merck, Darmstadt, Germany), were activated with methanol and conditioned with methanol:water (98:2, v/v). Following application of samples, columns were eluted with 5 mL of methanol:water (98:2, v/v), and the eluates filtered through PTFE membranes (0.45 µm; Millipore) prior to HPLC analysis. All samples were prepared in duplicate.
HPLC analysis.A Varian (Palo Alto, CA, USA) ProStar liquid chromatograph coupled to a photodiode array detector (PAD) and a ProStar 410 autosampler was used. Instrumental control and data processing were accomplished using a Varian Star chromatography   A) and water (solvent B), initially at 48:52 (A:B), changing by linear gradient to 75:25 over 30 min, and then by linear gradient to 100% A over 20 min, and finally isocratically with 100% A for 3 min. The solvent flow rate was 1.0 mL/min. Detection was at 235 nm for all samples; peaks of casearins were identified by analysis of UV spectra, obtained from the PAD detector, with λ max at 235 nm (Fig. 2).In order to provide a relative comparison among the different samples, the sum of the areas of the casearin peaks (in arbitrary units) was considered representative of casearin content. The predominance of casearins in these samples was confirmed from 1 H-NMR spectra (measured on a Varian Inova 500 MHz spectrometer) of leaf extracts, which showed prominent signals at δ 5.2 (d, H12), δ 5.6 (dd, H14), δ 5.1-5.2 (d, H15 a and H15 b ), δ 5.5 -6.4 (H18) and δ 6.5 (s, H19) that are characteristic of casearin-type clerodane diterpenes. The ratio of casearin content to the yield of crude extract obtained was employed as an indicator of extraction selectivity.Stabilisation procedures. The contents of casearins in samples obtained from leaves of a specimen of C. Sylvestris collected at the University Campus in Araraquara were evaluated as a function of the sample preparation procedure. The leaves were collected and immediately submitted to eight different conditions: freezing with liquid nitrogen followed by either oven drying (40°C for 48 h) or lyophilisation, freezing with dry ice (solid carbon dioxide) followed by either oven drying or lyophilisation, freezing with ice followed by either oven drying or lyophilisation, and direct oven drying or air drying at ambient temperature in the shade. In each experimental procedure, 0.400 g of leaves were extracted by sonication with 6.0 mL of dichloromethane saturated with ammonium hydroxide as solvent, followed by centrifugation (1200 g, 10 min). The sample clean-up and HPLC analyses were as described. Statistical significances between mean values were evaluated using Student's t-test at the 95% level.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Effect of extraction parametersTypical HPLC chromatograms of the extracts of the leaves of C. sylvestris obtained by maceration and sonication extraction are presented in Fig. 2. The influence of extraction time, solvent polarity and acidity conditions on the extraction of casearins from the leaves of C. sylvestris were evaluated through the construction of response surfaces. Such surfaces were fitted separately to each acidity condition. Most of the response variables had maximum stationary points and their critical values were within the experimental range (Figs 3 and4). The yield and selectivity of the extraction of casearins were greatly influenced by acidity conditions, being reduced under acidic conditions and increased under basic conditions in both the maceration and sonication methods. These results could be indicative of the presence of acid and/or phenolic compounds besides the casearins, which were not extracted by solvents with low polarity such as dichloromethane in alkaline conditions.
Casearin extraction by macerationThe maximum point for yield of crude extract was outside the response surface obtained (Fig. 3), but the response surface of casearin content and extraction selectivity both showed maximum points within the experimental range. The best estimated conditions for casearins after just 1 h of sonication would be similar to those available after 26 h of maceration (Table 2).
Verification of the quadratic response surface modelThe response surfaces for casearin content and extraction selectivity were statistically significant according to the F test at the 95% level (Table 3). In order to verify the accuracy of the response surface model, the optimum condition estimated for extraction by sonication was tested. All measured values of the response variables were within the 99% confidence range of predicted values based on quadratic response surface model (Table 4). the extraction of casearins from leaves of C. sylvestris by maceration given by the maximum stationary point (i.e. where the partial derivative of the response surface regression equation is equal to zero) involved 26 h extraction with dichloromethane saturated with ammonium hydroxide (Table 2).
Casearin extraction by sonicationAs with maceration, dichloromethane saturated with ammonium hydroxide was determined to be the best solvent for the extraction of casearins from leaves of C. sylvestris by sonication (Fig. 4). However, it was predicted that the extraction yield and selectivity of   
Sample stabilizationThe yield of crude extract, the casearin content and the extraction selectivity obtained from sonication extraction of leaves of C. sylvestris that had received eight different sample stabilisation procedures are shown (Fig. 5). The extractions were performed under the optimal conditions selected from the response surfaces. The highest yield of crude extract was obtained by extraction of leaves that had been frozen with solid carbon dioxide followed by lyophilisation, whilst the highest casearin content and selectivity were obtained by extraction of leaves that had been dried directly in an oven at 40°C. These results reveal that special treatments are needed in order to stabilise plant material to obtain maximum yield of casearins from the leaves. This finding is reinforced by consideration of the casearin content obtained from leaf samples air-dried in the shade, which was around 15% lower than that obtained from oven-dried materials.The response surface methodology was effective in optimising conditions for the extraction of casearins from the leaves of C. sylvestris, and there was a good correlation between the variables tested and the yield of secondary compound obtained. The casearin content and selectivity were dependent on, and greatly influenced by, polarity and acidity of solvents with the best results obtained following extraction with dichloromethane under alkaline conditions. The extracts obtained by sonication or by maceration under these conditions showed the same chromatographic profiles (Fig. 2   a The model has the form Y = a 1 + a 2 X 1 + a 3 X 2 + a 4 X 1 2 + a 5 X 1 X 2 + a 6 X 2 2 where Y = dependent variable, representing casearin content or extraction selectivity and X 1 and X 2 = independent variables representing extraction time and solvent polarity.that had been submitted to various sample stabilisation procedures were quite different, with the best results for casearin content and selectivity being obtained with samples dried in an oven at 40°C prior to extraction.  ) and extraction selectivity (ES) for different stabilisation treatments of plant material sampled. Key to treatments employed: a, liquid nitrogen followed by lyophilisation; b, liquid nitrogen followed by oven drying; c, dry ice followed by lyophilisation; d, dry followed by oven drying; e, ice followed by lyophilisation; f, ice followed by oven drying; g, direct oven drying; and h, air drying in the shade.Figure 11Figure 1 Casearins A-T and casearvestrins A-C previously isolated from Casearia sylvestris.
Figure 22Figure 2 Typical HPLC chromatograms of extracts from leaves of C. sylvestris obtained by (A) maceration, and (B) sonication extraction. Peaks marked * are attributed to casearins based on their UV spectra (shown as insert). (For extraction and analytical protocols see Experimental section).
Figure 33Figure 3 Response surfaces employed for the evaluation of the optimal conditions for the extraction of casearins by maceration at different acidity conditions [CE, yield of crude extract (%); CC, casearin content in area units × 10 -6 ; EC, extraction selectivity (CC/ CE)].
), which was indicative of the stability of casearins during the extraction protocol. Sonication extraction showed the advantage of a very much reduced extraction time compared with maceration extraction. The yield of crude extract obtained from leaf samples
Figure 44Figure 4 Response surfaces employed for the evaluation of the optimal conditions for the extraction of casearins by sonication at different acidity conditions [CE, yield of crude extract (%); CC, casearin content in area units × 10 -6 ; EC, extraction selectivity (CC/ CE)].
Figure 55Figure 5Yield of crude extract (CE; %), casearin content (CC; area units × 10 -6 ) and extraction selectivity (ES) for different stabilisation treatments of plant material sampled. Key to treatments employed: a, liquid nitrogen followed by lyophilisation; b, liquid nitrogen followed by oven drying; c, dry ice followed by lyophilisation; d, dry followed by oven drying; e, ice followed by lyophilisation; f, ice followed by oven drying; g, direct oven drying; and h, air drying in the shade.
Leaves of C. Sylvestris were collected from different locations in the State of São Paulo, including Gaggs Farm in Presidente Venceslau, the State Park Carlos Botelho in São Miguel Arcanjo, the Ecological State Park Juréia-Itatins/Núcleo Arpoador in Peruíbe Beach, and the Campus of São Paulo State University in Araraquara. The authenticities of the collected specimens were verified by Dr. Inês Cordeiro (IB-SMA/Materials.
Table 11Code values of variables in the maceration and sonication optimisation experimentsVariable code value
Table 22Optimal conditions (time and polarity index) for the extraction of casearins from leaves of Casearia sylvestris as determined from the response surface of casearin contents Estimated values of yield of crude extract, casearin content and extraction selectivity were calculated from the respective response surfaces using optimal conditions.Optimal conditionsEstimated values aExtractionYield of crudeCasearin contenttechniqueAcidity conditionsTime (h)Polarityextract (%)(area units × 10 -6 )Extraction selectivity aMacerationPure solvent52.05.17.864.16.8Saturated with formic acid18.05.825.149.32.0Saturated with ammonium26.23.411.475.36.8hydroxideSonicationPure solvent1.405.414.675.15.0Saturated with formic acid1.807.035.757.61.9Saturated with ammonium0.923.48.468.27.1hydroxidea
Table 33Verification of the quadratic response surface model aSaturated with
Table 44Test of the optimal extraction conditions determined from the response surfacesCasearin content(area units × 10 -6 )Extraction selectivitya Determined for the tested point on the basis of quadratic model (see Table2).
