Antioxidant Flavan-3-ols and Flavonol Glycosides from Maytenus aquifolium
and could hence play a role in the defense of the organism against oxidative stress (Gordon, 1996;Pietta, 2000). Reactivity of flavonoids has been studied under many experimental conditions and towards several free radicals. These investigations have demonstrated that the antioxidant capacity of flavonoids is mainly due to radical scavenging properties (Cotelle et al., 1996;Nanjo et al., 1996). In addition, the antioxidant activity of a compound depends ultimately on its ease of oxidation and, for a variety of natural or synthetic compounds, good correlations have been observed between antioxidant activities and low oxidation potentials (Born et al., 1996;Chevion et al., 2000). The present work deals with the isolation and identification of flavonoids from M. aquifolium, which have inhibited the bleaching of β-carotene on TLC plates, and the evaluation of parameters related to the antioxidant activity by separately measuring their oxidation potentials through cyclic voltammetry and the free radical scavenging ability towards DPPH (2,2-diphenyl-1-picrylhydrazyl).
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Generalexperimental procedures. Silica gel (Merck, 230-400 and 70-230 Mesh), Sephadex LH-20 (Pharmacia) and polyvinylpolypyrrolidone (PVPP) were used for column chromatography unless otherwise stated and solvents were redistilled prior to use. NMR spectra were recorded on Bruker AC-200 or Varian INOVA 500 spectrometers at 200 or 500 MHz, respectively, for 1 H NMR, and at 50 or 125 MHz, respectively, for 13 C NMR, with TMS as internal standard and DMSO-d 6 or MeOH-d 4 as solvent. ES-MS were recorded on a VG Platform II spectrometer. IR and UV spectra were

INTRODUCTIONIn the course of our systematic studies on the chemistry of Maytenus species, we have investigated Maytenus aquifolium Martius (Celastraceae), a tree widely distributed in Cerrado region of Brazil. The infusion of M. aquifolium leaves is one of the most popular antiulcer traditional drugs in Brazil (Carlini, 1988) and its effectiveness has been proved in ethanol and/or indomethacin-induced gastric lesion models (Bersani-Amado et al., 2000;Vilegas et al., 1999). Our previous studies on M. aquifolium were carried out on its leaves and root barks and showed the presence of sesquiterpene pyridine alkaloids, quinonemethide and friedelane triterpenes (Corsino et al., 1998a;1998b;2000). On the other hand, nothing has been reported on the antioxidant properties of the constituents of M. aquifolium.TLC analysis using β-carotene as a spray reagent (Pratt and Miller, 1984) revealed the presence of antioxidant compounds in the MeOH extract of the leaves and root bark of M. aquifolium. Their isolation and identification as catechins and flavonol glycosides were subsequently undertaken. Flavonoids are acknowledged as having interesting medicinal properties as antiinflammatory, antibacterial, antiviral and antitumor activities and are by far the most comprehensively investigated natural products when considering antioxidative properties. Extraction and isolation. Dried and powdered leaves of M. aquifolium (4.5 kg) were extracted with ethanol. The resulting EtOH extract was filtered and concentrated in vacuum to afford a green gum (896.7 g). The EtOAc soluble part of the EtOH extract (5.3 g) was applied to a Sephadex LH-20 column (300.0 g), eluted with MeOH to give 30 fractions. Fraction 13 (0.234 g) was applied to a silica gel column (300.0 g) and eluted with CHCl 3 /MeOH gradient to give 10 fractions. Fractions 7 and 17 were identified as compounds 2 (0.089 g) and 3 (0.139 g), respectively. The methanol insoluble part of the EtOH extract (2.0 g) was submitted to Sephadex LH 20 column (100.0 g) eluted with MeOH to give 35 fractions. Fraction 10 was applied to a polyvinylpolypyrrolidone (PVPP) column (6.0 g) eluted with MeOH to afford 15 fractions, yielding 4 (0.093 g) and 5 (0.034 g) as pure compounds. The dried and powdered root bark of Maytenus aquifolium (925.2 g) was extracted with EtOH and concentrated to give a brown gum (17.4 g). The EtOAc soluble part of this extract (2.2 g) was applied to a Sephadex LH-20 column (100.0 g) and eluted with MeOH to give 30 fractions. Fraction 14 was identified as compound 1 (0.017 g).
Bleaching experiments on ββ β β β-carotene. After develop- ing and drying, TLC plates were sprayed with a 0.02% solution of β-carotene (Aldrich) in CH 2 Cl 2 . Plates were placed under natural light until discoloration of background. The remaining yellow spots indicated the presence of antioxidant substances (Pratt and Miller, 1984). Spectrophotometric assay on the reduction of 2,2diphenyl-1-picrylhydrazyl radical. Reaction mixtures containing test samples (dissolved in MeOH) at several concentrations and 0.004% DPPH methanolic solutions were incubated at 25 °C for 30 min. Absorbances of the resulting solutions were measured using a Milton Roy 20D spectrophotometer at 517 nm and the percent inhibition was determined by comparison with a MeOH treated control group (Cuendet et al., 1997).Electrochemical assay. The cyclic voltammograms were carried out with a Polarecord E-506 (Metrohm) potentiostat. A three electrode system (663 VA, Metrohm) with a working electrode of glassy carbon (GC), a Ag/AgCl reference electrode and a carbon auxiliary electrode was used. DMF (Merck) was used as solvent and tetra-n-butyl ammonium tetrafluorborate (Merck), as the supporting electrolyte. Rutin (Aldrich) was used as reference compound for its well known electron-reductive properties [Van Acker et al., 1996;Peyrat-Maillard et al., 2000]. The working electrode was polished with aluminium oxide 0.3 µ (Buehler) and special polishing cloth (Buehler) prior to each measurement, because formation of a polymeric film inactivated the electrode after each scan. The electrode was then washed thoroughly with water, dried and cycled several times in the range -1.6 to + 0.6 V in order to reassure the absence of voltammetric signal due to the supporting electrolyte. Each compound was dissolved to concentrations of 10-20 mM in DMF and added to a 15 mL aliquot of the supporting electrolyte. The solutions were then deoxygenated with nitrogen for 10 min and the cyclic voltammograms were carried out at scan rates of 50, 100 or 200 mV/s.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONDried leaves and root barks were separately powdered and extracted with ethanol. TLC analysis of the crude extract using β-carotene solution as spray reagent (Pratt and Miller, 1984) revealed the presence of antioxidant compounds. Chromatographic fractionation of this extract guided by the antioxidant assay with β-carotene afforded flavan-3-ols 1-3 and flavonol glycosides 4 and 5 (Fig. 1). Their identification was based on spectrometric data, mainly MS, uni and bidimensional NMR techniques as well as comparison with literature data (Vilegas et al., 1999;Agrawal and Bansen, 1989). Specific information on the identity of sugar moieties, including sterochemical aspects, and their position of linkage to the aglycone and to other sugar units followed from extensive analyses of PND and DEPT 135°1 3 C NMR, HMBC spectra as well as from analyses of coupling constants of the anomeric hydrogen signals on the 1 H NMR spectra of compounds 4 and 5.Antioxidative properties of flavonoids 1-5 were evaluated against β-carotene (Pratt and Miller, 1984). Compounds 1-3 and 5 (10 µg) appeared as yellow spots against the TLC plate white background whereas compound 4 (10 µg) appeared as a pale-yellow spot owing to its weaker antioxidant activity. The antioxidant activity of flavonoids is due to the presence of structural features as ortho-dihydroxy groups (usually on B ring), α,β-unsaturated carbonyl moiety and αand/or β-hydroxyketone groups, which are responsible for chelating properties or enhancement of the radicalar stabilization after the initial oxidation steps (Bors et al., 1990). The lack of a catechol moiety on B ring and a free hydroxy group at C-3 in flavonol 4 may account for its low ability to protect β-carotene from bleaching and for the higher oxidation potential observed on its cyclic voltammogram when compared to compound 5 (Table 1). These structural features should also be predictive of the poor radical scavenging properties of flavonol 4, when compared to flavan-3-ols 1-3 and to   which are believed to be the major electrochemically active groups in these compounds. The absence of an α,β-unsaturated carbonyl moiety conjugated to the B ring accounts for their higher oxidation potential when compared to compounds 4 and 5. The presence of a 4-oxo function on flavonol 4 gave rise to a β-hydroxy ketone group which probably enhances the ease of flavonoid oxidation, resulting in the oxidation peak at + 0.48 V on its cyclic voltammogram. These structural features, in addition to the catechol moiety on the B ring of flavonol 5, conferred the highest stabilization ability for this quercetin derivative, resulting in the lowest oxidation potential (+ 0.30V) among flavonoids 1-5.The association of antioxidant and antiulcer activities evidencing gastroprotective effect of antioxidants after stress-induced oxidative damage on gastric mucosa has been demonstrated by several means: through induction of anti-lipoperoxidative processes, enhancement of free-radical scavenging and antioxidant enzymes (e.g. glutathione peroxidase: GSH-Px) activity and/or reduction of the main sources of oxygen radicals in such systems, myeloperoxidase (MPO) and xanthine oxidase (XOD) (Osakabe et al., 1998;La Casa et al., 2000).Antioxidant-rich fractions (e.g. polyphenols) from plant extracts have been extensively used in experimental models to prove their inhibitory effect on induced ulceration. (Osakabe et al., 1998;Vilegas et al., 1999). Pure compounds have also been submitted to antiulcer activity evaluation. The protective effect of rutin, a widespread flavonol glycoside, against ethanolinduced gastric lesions as well as the inhibition of gastric H + , K + -ATPase by catechins have already been assessed (Murakami et al., 1992;La Casa et al., 2000). The quantification of flavonoids in M. aquifolium has been recently performed and showed that flavonols are the major compounds, representing ca 7.6% of the dry EtOH extract (Leite et al., 2001). The presence of significant amounts of antioxidant hydrosoluble flavonoids in the leaves of Maytenus aquifolium may therefore consist evidence for the efficiency of its infusion as an antiulcer agent and legitimate its ethnopharmacological use.Figure 1 .1Figure 1. Flavonoids from Maytenus aquifolium.
Figure 2 .2Figure 2. Radical scavenging properties of flavonoids 1-5 and standard compound rutin.
They are widely distributed in food obtained on Nicolet and Lambda 14P Perkin Elmer spectrophotometers, respectively.Plant Material. Leaves and root bark of Maytenusaquifolium Martius were collected from a privateculture in Ribeirão Preto, São Paulo and identifiedby Dr Rita Maria de Carvalho. A voucher specimen(number HPM0268) is deposited in the Herbariumof the University of Ribeirão Preto (UNAERP), SãoPaulo, Brazil.
Table 1 . Oxidation potential from cyclic voltammograms for flavonoids 1-5 and reference compounds rutin and BHT in DMF1CompoundE P ox1+0.762+0.823+0.804+0.495+0.30Rutin+0.31
