Casearin X exhibits cytotoxic effects in leukemia cells triggered by apoptosis
Clerodane diterpenes have demonstrated cytotoxic, antiplasmodial and anti-ulcer properties. In the present work, we determined the cytotoxic effect of casearin L (Cas L), O (Cas O) and X (Cas X) and (-)hardwickiic acid isolated from Casearia sylvestris leaves, and investigated the underlying mechanisms involved in in vitro cell death induced by Cas X in HL-60 leukemia cells (0.7, 1.5 and 3.0 M). Cytotoxicity tests demonstrated that Cas X was the most active compound studied, showing greater cytotoxic effects against CEM and HL-60 lines (IC 50 of 0.4 M) and human peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC, IC 50 of 1.2 M). After 24 h exposure, Cas X caused a decrease in 5-bromo-20-deoxyuridine (BrdU) incorporation (36.6 and 24.5% labeling at 0.7 and 1.5 M, respectively), reduction in viability, and increase in apoptotic and necrotic leukemia cells in a dose-dependent manner evidenced by the trypan blue and AO/EB (acridine orange/ethidium bromide) assays. Moreover, Cas X-treated cells exhibited nuclear fragmentation and cytoplasmic vacuolization depending on the concentration tested. These characteristics of apoptosis or secondary necrosis were confirmed by flow cytometry which revealed DNA fragmentation, phosphatidylserine externalization, activation of the effector caspases 3/7 and mitochondrial depolarization. We then found evidence that Cas X causes cell death via apoptotic pathways, corroborating the potential of casearins as compounds with promising antitumor-related properties.

IntroductionCancer is a pathological consequence with multifactorial causes such as mutations in specific genes (proto-oncogenes/tumor suppressors) or post-translational modifications of proteins, where key events can increase cancer risk and lead to uncontrolled proliferation [1]. Chemotherapy remains the most important line of defense for patients with hematological malignancies and aggressive forms of solid tumors. However, drug toxicity and efficacy vary widely among these patients [2]. Many drugs normally kill cancer cells by inducing either apoptosis or necrosis, two forms of cell death with distinct morphological and biochemical features [3][4][5]. In this scenario, plant compounds have made valuable contributions to the discovery of new naturally occurring anticancer agents, especially those from tropical and sub-tropical regions of the world [6].Casearia sylvestris Swartz (Salicaceae), a medicinal tree that grows practically throughout the entire Brazilian territory from Amazonas State (Tapajós River region) to Rio Grande do Sul State [7,8], is popularly known as "guac ¸atonga," "cafezinho-do-mato," "café-Silvestre" and "erva-de-bugre." Its leaves are used for treating traumas, for skin and oral wound healing and as a topical anesthetic and antiseptic [7,9]. In vitro and pre-clinical studies have highlighted its anti-inflammatory [10][11][12], antimicrobial [13][14][15], antiplasmodial [16], and anti-ulcer [11,17,18] properties.Phytochemical investigations of C. sylvestris leaf extracts have led to the discovery of bioactive clerodanes, the casearins and casearvestrins, which are oxygenated tricyclic diterpenes with excellent cytotoxic and antitumor potential [14,19,[20][21][22]. Despite their well-known antiproliferative actions, there are no studies showing how these diterpenes cause cell death, although Huang et al. [23] have suggested that clerodane diterpenes isolated from Casearia membranacea induce apoptosis in PC-3 cells (human prostate tumor line).In this work, we determined the cytotoxic activity of clerodane diterpenes [casearins L (Cas L), O (Cas O) and X (Cas X) and (-)hardwickiic acid isolated from C. sylvestris leaves and investigated the cytotoxic effects of Cas X on HL-60 leukemia cells and the underlying mechanisms involved in its in vitro cytotoxic action.
Material and methods
Plant material and structure determinationLeaves of C. sylvestris were collected at the Parque Estadual Carlos Botelho (São Miguel Arcanjo, São Paulo, Brazil) in March and July 2004. Voucher specimens were deposited at the Herbarium 'Maria Eneida P. Kaufmann' (Instituto Botânico do Estado de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil) with the reference numbers AGS04, AGS05, AGS06, AGS13 and AGS19. The plant material was identified by Dr. Ines Cordeiro (Instituto Botânico do Estado de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil). Dried and powdered leaves of C. sylvestris were extracted with ethanol in a stainless steel extractor with solvent reflux for ca. 24 h at 40 • C. The crude extract was concentrated under reduced pressure (rotary evaporator) and dried in desiccators over silica gel under reduced pressure to yield a dry residue.The structure of the compounds casearins L, O, X and (-)hardwickiic acid was determined from spectrometric data (nuclear magnetic resonance, ultraviolet, infrared and mass spectrometry) and by comparison with spectral information available in Santos et al. [21] and Santos et al. [22].
Cytotoxicity against tumor cell linesThe cytotoxicity of the clerodane diterpenes [(Cas L, Cas O, Cas X and (-)-hardwickiic acid)] was evaluated by the MTT assay [24] against 3 human leukemia cell lines: HL-60, K-562 and CEM, all obtained from the National Cancer Institute (NCI, Bethesda, MD, USA). Cell lines were maintained in RPMI 1640 medium supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum, 2 mM glutamine, 100 U/mL penicillin and 100 g/mL streptomycin, at 37 • C with 5% CO 2 . By an indirect way, tumor cell proliferation was quantified through the ability of living cells to reduce the yellow dye 3-(4,5-dimethyl-2thiazolyl)-2,5-diphenyl-2H-tetrazolium bromide (MTT) to a purple formazan product [24]. Briefly, cells were plated in 96-well plates and diterpenes (0.01-10 M) were added to wells. After 69 h of incubation, the supernatant was replaced by fresh medium containing MTT 10%. Three hours later, the MTT formazan product was dissolved in 150 L DMSO and absorbance was measured at 595 nm (DTX 880, Beckman Coulter). Doxorubicin (Dox, Sigma Aldrich) was used as a positive control (0.02-8.6 M).To avoid false proliferation data, the experiments were performed in triplicate and the proliferation rate was always compared to negative controls. In all replicates, similar inhibition rates and cell proliferation in negative control wells were higher than in the treated wells.
Alamar Blue assayIn order to investigate the selectivity of Cas X for normal proliferating cells, the Alamar Blue TM assay was performed with human peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) after 72 h drug exposure. All studies were performed in accordance with Brazilian research guidelines (Law 196/96, National Council of Health).Heparinized blood (from healthy, non-smoker donors who had not taken any drug for at least 15 days prior to sampling, aged between 18 and 30 years old) was collected, and PBMC were isolated by a standard method of density-gradient centrifugation over Ficoll-Hypaque. PBMC were washed and resuspended at a concentration of 3 × 10 5 cells/mL in RPMI 1640 medium supplemented with 20% fetal bovine serum, 2 mM glutamine, 100 U/mL penicillin, 100 g/mL streptomycin at 37 • C with 5% CO 2 . Phytohemagglutinin (4%) was added at the beginning of culture, according to Cavalcanti et al. [25] with some modifications. PBMC were then plated in 96-well plates (3 × 10 5 cells/well in 100 L of medium). After 24 h, the test compound (0.01-10 M) dissolved in 1% DMSO was added to each well, and the cells were incubated for another 72 h. Dox (0.02-8.6 M) was used as positive control. Control groups received the same amount of DMSO. Twenty-four hours before the end of the incubation, 10 L of stock solution (0.312 mg/mL) of Alamar Blue (Resazurin, Sigma Aldrich Co) were added to each well. The absorbance was measured using a multiplate reader (DTX 880 Multimode Detector, Beckman Coulter ® ), and the drug effect was quantified as the percentage of control absorbance at 570 nm and 595 nm. The absorbance of Alamar Blue in culture medium is measured at a higher wavelength and a lower wavelength. The absorbance of medium only is also measured at the higher and lower wavelengths. The absorbance of the medium alone is subtracted from the absorbance of medium plus Alamar Blue at the higher wavelength. This value is called AO HW . The absorbance of the medium alone is subtracted from the absorbance of medium plus Alamar Blue at the lower wavelength. This value is called AO LW . A correction factor R 0 can be calculated from AO HW and AO LW , where R 0 = AO LW /AO HW . The percent Alamar Blue reduced is then expressed as follows: % Reduced = A LW -(A HW × R 0 ) × 100.
Evaluation of mechanism involved in leukemia cell (HL-60) cytotoxicityThe following experiments were performed in order to investigate the mechanism involved in the cytotoxic effect of Cas X. The doses were chosen based on IC 50 values of Cas X in HL-60 cells after 24-h exposure. Cas X dissolved in sterile DMSO was added to HL-60 cell cultures (0.3 × 10 6 cells/mL) to obtain final concentrations of 0.7, 1.5 and 3.0 M (IC 50 /2, IC 50 and 2 × IC 50 , respectively). Dox, 0.6 M, was used as a positive control.
Trypan blue exclusionCell viability was determined by the trypan blue exclusion assay [26]. Aliquots from each well were removed from cultures after 24 h of incubation and cells were scored in a Neubauer chamber.
Inhibition of DNA synthesisHL-60 cells were plated in 24-well tissue culture plates (2 mL/well) and treated with Cas X. Before the end of drug exposure, 20 L of 5-bromo-2 -deoxyuridine (BrdU, 10 mM) were added to each well and the cells incubated for another 3 h at 37 • C. To determine the amount of BrdU incorporated into DNA, cells were harvested, transferred to cytospin slides, and allowed to dry for 2 h at room temperature [27]. Cells that had incorporated BrdU were labeled by direct peroxidase immunocytochemistry, using the chromogen diaminobenzidine (DAB). Slides were counterstained with hematoxylin, mounted, and coverslipped. The determination of BrdU positivity was performed by light microscopy (Olympus, Tokyo, Japan). Two hundred cells were counted per slide to determine the percentage of BrdU-positive cells.
Staining with hematoxylin-eosinUntreated or Cas X-treated HL-60 cells were examined for morphological changes by light microscopy (Metrimpex Hungary/PZO-Labimex Modelo Studar Lab ® ). To evaluate morphology, cells were harvested, transferred to cytospin slides, fixed with methanol for 1 min and stained with hematoxylin-eosin (H&E, Sigma Aldrich Co. -St. Louis, MO/USA).
Morphological analysis using fluorescence microscopyAcridine orange/ethidium bromide (AO/EB) staining of HL-60 cells was performed to determine the cell death pattern induced by increasing concentrations of Cas X. Although AO and EB are DNA intercalating molecules, the first is able to cross intact membranes and confers green appearance to the nucleus of viable cells. On the other hand, EB is incorporated mainly by non-viable cells or in the presence of membrane instability, staining nucleus in red [28]. So, after 24 h of incubation, cells were pelleted, and each sample was mixed with 1 L of aqueous AO/EB solution (100 g/mL of AO in PBS; 100 g/mL EB in PBS) just prior to fluorescence microscopy analysis and quantification (Olympus, Tokyo, Japan). Three hundred cells were counted per sample and scored as follows: viable cells, apoptotic cells and necrotic cells [29].
Flow cytometry analysisAll flow cytometry analyses were performed in a Guava EasyCyte Mine using Guava Express Plus software. Five thousand events were evaluated per experiment and cell debris was omitted from the analysis.2.4.5.1. Cell membrane integrity. Cell membrane integrity was evaluated by the exclusion of propidium iodide (50 g/mL, Sigma Aldrich Co. -St. Louis, MO/USA). Briefly, 100 L of treated and untreated cells were incubated with propidium iodide (50 g/mL). The cells were then incubated for 5 min. Fluorescence was measured and cell morphology, granularity and membrane integrity were determined [30].2.4.5.2. Internucleosomal DNA fragmentation. Internucleosomal DNA fragmentation was evaluated by the incorporation of propidium iodide (50 g/mL). Briefly, HL-60 cells were treated and then incubated at 25 • C for 30 min, in the dark, in a lysis solution containing 0.1% citrate, 0.1% Triton X-100 and 50 g/mL propidium iodide. Fluorescence was measured and DNA fragmentation was analyzed [31].
Measurement of mitocondrial transmembrane potential.Mitochondrial depolarization was evaluated by incorporation of rhodamine 123 (Sigma Aldrich Co. -St. Louis, MO/USA). Rhodamine 123 is a cell-permeable, cationic, fluorescent dye that is readily sequestered by active mitochondria without inducing cytotoxic effects. Briefly, cells were centrifuged at 2000 rpm for 5 min, and the pellet was resuspended in 200 L of 1 g/mL rhodamine 123 for 15 min in the dark. After incubation, cells were centrifuged at 2000 rpm for 5 min, and the pellet was resuspended in 200 L in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and incubated for 30 min in the dark. Fluorescence was measured and percentage mitochondrial depolarization was determined [29].2.4.5.4. Phosphatidylserine (PS) externalization. PS externalization was demonstrated by flow cytometry after PS staining with annexin V according to the method described by Vermes et al. [32]. Briefly, cells were washed twice with cold PBS and then resuspended in 135 L of PBS with 5 L of 7-amino-actinomycin D (7-AAD) and 10 L of annexin V-PE (Guava Nexin Assay Kit). The cells were gently vortexed and incubated for 20 min at room temperature (20-25 • C) in the dark. Afterward, the cells were analyzed by flow cytometry (EasyCyte from Guava Technologies). Annexin V is a phospholipid-binding protein that has a high affinity for PS. 7-AAD, a cell impermeant dye, is used as an indicator of membrane structural integrity. Fluorescence of annexin V-PE was measured at 583 nm (yellow fluorescence) and 7-AAD at 680 nm (red fluorescence). The percentages of early and late apoptotic cells and necrotic cells were then calculated.2.4.5.5. Detection of caspases 3 and 7. Caspase 3/7 activity was estimated by flow cytometry, using the Guava EasyCyte Caspase Kit, after 24 h of incubation. HL-60 cells (3 × 10 5 cells/mL) were incubated with Fluorescent Labeled Inhibitor of Caspases (FLICA) and maintained for 1 h at 37 • C and 5% CO 2 . After incubation, 80 L of washing buffer were added and cells were centrifuged at 2000 rpm for 5 min. The resulting pellet was resuspended in 200 L of washing buffer and centrifuged again. The cells were then resuspended in the working solution (propidium iodide 1:200 in 1× washing buffer) and analyzed immediately by flow cytometry.
Statistical analysisFor cytotoxicity studies, the IC 50 values and their 95% confidence intervals were obtained by nonlinear regression using the Graphpad program (Intuitive Software for Science, San Diego, CA). In order to determine differences, data were compared by one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) followed by the Newman-Keuls test (p < 0.01).
Results
Cytotoxicity against tumor and normal cellsCytotoxicity analyses by MTT after 72 h of incubation displayed that Cas X was the most active clerodane diterpene (Table 1), showing higher cytotoxic effects against CEM and HL-60 cells with IC 50 values of 0.4 M for both cell lines. Interestingly, K-562 cells were more resistant to Cas X, displaying an IC 50 of 9 M. On the other hand, casearins L and O were moderately cytotoxic while (-)-hardwickiic acid was ineffective in inhibiting cell proliferation. PBMC assay showed IC 50 values of 1.2 (1.0-1.4) M and 1.5 (1.1-2.0) M for Cas X and Dox, respectively.All following experiments were performed with HL-60 cells to investigate the mechanism of action of Cas X.
Cell viability, DNA synthesis and morphological changesHL-60 cells treated with Cas X had significantly reduced cell viability and increased number of non-viable cells (p < 0.01), showing a dose-dependent effect after 24 h of exposure (Fig. 1A).Aiming to understand the antiproliferative effect of Cas X, BrdU incorporation into the DNA was measured. All experiments were performed in three concentrations (0.7, 1.5 and 3 M), but the highest one did not allow a confident cell analysis after treatment,
Table 1Cytotoxicity activity of clerodane diterpenes on human leukemia cell lines after 72 h of exposure evaluated by MTT assay.
Cell lineCompound -IC50 g/mL (M) a  probably because the concentration of 3uM is too higher, leading to destabilization of the plasma membrane and severe cell destruction, interfering in the morphological examination required by the method [33]. As seen in Fig. 1B, Cas X led to decreasing BrdU incorporation, with 36.6 and 24.5% labeling in relation to control at 0.7 and 1.5 M, respectively (p < 0.01), while Dox (0.6 M) led to 26.5% BrdU labeling.To establish whether the growth inhibition displayed by Cas X was related to the induction of apoptosis and/or necrosis, treated cells were analyzed using AO/EB staining by fluorescence microscopy and the numbers of viable, apoptotic and necrotic cells were determined. After treatment, there was a reduction in the number of viable cells in a dose-dependent manner, while apoptotic and necrotic cells increased (p < 0.01) (Fig. 1C). Apoptosis was observed at the lower doses of 0.7 and 1.5 M (82 and 88.1%, respectively), while at the highest dose, 3.0 M, necrosis was the main cell death pattern (77.7%).Treated and untreated cells were examined under light microscopy following H/E staining. Control cells exhibited a typical non-adherent, round morphology with vacuolization (Fig. 2A), while Cas X-treated cells displayed a gradual chromatin conden-sation and fragmentation, vacuolization of the cytoplasm, cell shrinking and destabilization of the plasma membrane (Fig. 2C-E), especially at 1.5 M (Fig. 2E). Dox (0.6 M) induced a reduction in cell volume, along wtih nuclear disintegration and destabilization of the plasma membrane (Fig. 2B).
Mechanism of action underlying Cas X cytotoxicity -flow cytometry analysis
Membrane disruptionCas X induced plasma membrane disruption in HL-60 cells in a dose-dependent manner (p < 0.01, Fig. 3A), whereas at 1.5 M (5.8%) and 3.0 M, 24.6% of the cells showed membrane lysis when compared to untreated cells (1.4%). Doxorubicin, positive control, also caused membrane disruption (7.4%).
Internucleosomal DNA fragmentationInternucleosomal DNA fragmentation results are presented in Fig. 3B. Results were obtained by DNA size, and sub-diploid pattern was considered fragmented. DNA fragmentation (p < 0.01) was observed in all concentrations tested in a dose-dependent manner, with 14. 5, 61.9 and 80.5% for cells treated with Cas X at 0.7, 1.5 and 3.0 M, respectively, when compared to control (1.4%).
Mitochondrial depolarizationMitochondrial depolarization is a feature of apoptosis. HL-60 treated cells (Fig. 3C) showed mitochondrial depolarization at all concentrations tested: 23.2, 68.8 and 21.8%, for 0.7, 1.5 and 3.0 M, respectively. It is important to note that at the highest concentration (3.0 M) a false mitochondrial repolarization occurred, which can be explained by severe cell destruction [33].
Caspase 3/7 activationCaspase 3/7 activation was found with all concentrations tested (Fig. 3D). Early apoptotic cells were observed with 3.0 M Cas X (17.3%). Meanwhile, an increase in late apoptosis (13.3, 27.7 and 10.8%) and necrosis (6.4, 6.9 and 6.1%) was observed in cells treated with 1.5 M and 3.0 M Cas X and Dox, respectively (p < 0.01). No differences were observed at the lowest concentration of Cas X (0.7 M).
Phosphatidylserine externalizationPhosphatidylserine (PS) detection is a hallmark of apoptosis; PS resides on the surface of the plasma membrane, where cell damage leads to its externalization [32]. Cells treated with Cas X at all concentrations displayed PS externalization (p < 0.01, Fig. 4). The number of early apoptotic cells increased in a dose-dependent manner [10.1, 18.4 and 38.4% for cells treated with Cas X at 0.7 (Fig. 4C), 1.5 (Fig. 4D) and 3.0 M (Fig. 4E), respectively]. Meanwhile, late apoptosis was more frequent at 1.5 and 3.0 M (17.8 and 39.6%, respectively).
DiscussionDrug discovery from medicinal plants has played an important role in cancer chemotherapy. Of all the available anticancer drugs between 1940 and 2002, 40% were natural products per se or natural product-derived [34,35]. Nevertheless, many cancer patients fail chemotherapy, either because of undesired side effects or multi-drug resistance [2]. Therefore, it is very important to find new compounds with antineoplastic activity with more specificity against cancer cells and thus fewer side effects. In this way, Casearia species have a wide range of biological activities [11,24,36,37] that make it a probable source of new active compounds with anticancer properties. In the present work, the cytotoxic effect of the clerodane diterpenes (-)-hardwickiic acid and casearins L, O and X isolated from C. sylvestris leaves was determined in three leukemia lines (CEM, HL-60 and K-562). Also, the cytotoxicity of Cas X was investigated in normal PBM proliferating cells. The underlying mechanism of action of Cas X was further evaluated using the HL-60 cell line as a model [33,38].MTT assays showed that all compounds tested were active against at least one cell line, where Cas X was the most active against HL-60 and CEM cell lines. PBMC were also sensitive to Cas X but 3-fold less than the leukemia cells. Only (-)-hardwickiic acid showed no cytotoxicity against the leukemia cell lines. Several authors have demonstrated that clerodane diterpenes, secondary metabolites present in Casearia species, are cytotoxic to different tumor cell lines, such as colon (HCT-116), leukemia (HL-60), ovarian (A2780), prostate (PC-3), and normal fibroblasts (L-929, V-79) [14,22,37,[39][40][41]. More recently, we demonstrated the cytotoxic capacity of the Cas X against leukemia (MOLT-4, IC 50 value of 0.22 M), melanoma (MDA/MB-435, 0.35 M), nervous system (SF-295, 0. 43 M), and colon (HCT-8, 0.97 M) cancer cells [22]. Concerning chemotherapeutic potential, it is important to determine if the compound shows harmful effects in normal dividing cells such as proliferating leukocytes [42]. Herein, the data insinuate a narrow selectivity of Cas X towards cancer cells, though we previously showed that Cas X was up to 12-fold more selective against adherent cancer lines when compared to normal fibroblasts [22].Structural comparison of known casearins revealed that the main differences in activity involve substitutions at C-2, C-6, C-7, C-18 and C-19. Replacement of the acyl group at C-6 markedly decreases activity of the derivatives, indicating that the bulkiness at that site is important for biological activity [20]. Cytotoxic effects of casearin L, O and X seem to depend on the ring structure formed by carbons C-18 and C-19, since acid hydrolysis and opening of this ring leads to molecular instability and loss of bioactivity [37] as seen with (-)-hardwickiic acid, which does not inhibit cell proliferation (Fig. 5). Moreover, (-)-hardwickiic acid was one of the first diterpenes reported in C. sylvestris without the typical highly oxygenated backbone [21]. Many of the clerodanes that are highly oxygenated exhibit effective insect antifeedant, antibacterial, cytotoxic and antifungal properties [14,41,43].The antiproliferative effects of Cas X in leukemia cells were confirmed by the trypan blue exclusion assay, BrdU incorporation and flow cytometry. Furthermore, morphological analysis using HE and AO/BE staining after 24 h of incubation revealed that treated cells displayed typical apoptotic and necrotic features, including signs of extensive destabilization of the plasma membrane, reduction in cell volume, intense karyorrhexis (nuclear fragmentation) and pyknotic nuclei typical of necrotic processes, suggesting rapid activation of apoptosis pathways that culminate in the induction of necrosis. In fact, Cas X-treated cells displayed apoptotic features concentrations as low as 0.7 M with an increase in necrotic cells at 3.0 M, probably as a result of a later apoptosis stage. Generally, apoptotic cells simultaneously show membrane integrity and high rates of DNA fragmentation [5]. Since PI enters the cells only if the membrane becomes permeable, it is widely   used to measure plasma membrane integrity and to discriminate between primary and secondary necrosis. Also, a critical stage of apoptosis involves the acquisition of surface changes by dying cells, which trigger their specific recognition and removal by phagocytes, where the latter could eventually prevent potential tissue injury resulting from cell lysis in situ [44]. This cell engulfment is signaled by externalization of PS, a phospholipid predominantly observed on the inner surface facing the cytosol [32]. If apoptosis is activated, PS on the external leaflet of the lipid bilayer can be detected using annexin V, a 35-kDa Ca 2+ -binding protein, with high affinity for PS. The lower dose effects observed after Cas X treatment were membrane integrity, mitochondrial depolarization, DNA fragmentation and PS externalization, all features of apoptosis. As a nuclear feature of apoptosis, the internucleosomal fragmentation of double-stranded DNA is attributed to caspases, cysteine aspartatespecific proteases synthesized as zymogens that cleave different proteins, such as caspase-3, the major effector caspase that predominantly disintegrates laminin and nuclear mitotic apparatus proteins [45]. With increasing concentration of Cas X, necrosis features such as loss of membrane integrity, loss of mitochondrial depolarization, and caspase 3/7 highly activated were observed after Cas X treatment. These data confirm those obtained with morphological approaches (trypan blue exclusion and AO/EB and H&E staining) in which dose-dependent effects were observed, suggestive of secondary necrosis or late apoptosis. Secondary necrosis occurs when apoptotic cells cannot maintain ATP production or control oxidative stress [46]. Dose-dependent regulation of cellular processes is one of the most important characteristics of signaling molecules naturally occurring in cells. Therefore, depending on the concentration used, many different processes may be influenced and/or altered [47]. The data presented here are at odds with a previous work by Carvalho et al. [13] who demonstrated that casearins G, S and T displayed DNA damage via acetylation in Saccharomyces cerevisiae mutants. Our findings are also in agreement with those of Huang et al. [23] who discovered that caseamembrins A-F, clerodane diterpenes isolated from C. membranacea leaves, are able to activate caspase-8 and -9 in PC-3 cells.R 1 R 2 R 3 R 4 1 CH3 n-C O 3H7CO2 CH3CO2 OH 2 CH3 n-C O 3H7CO2 CH3CO2 n-C3H7CO2 3 n-C3H7CO2 n-C3H7CO2 H OHIn conclusion, the data presented in this work demonstrate that casearins L, O and X have a strong cytotoxic effect on leukemia cell lines, while (-)-hardwickiic acid does not, which is probably related to the highly oxygenated backbone present in the casearins and absent in (-)-hardwickiic acid. Also, we provide strong evidence that Cas X exerts its cytotoxic effect through induction of apop-tosis, which emphasizes the potential of casearins as compounds with promising antitumor-related properties and as interesting lead molecules for the design of new anticancer drugs.Fig. 1 .1Fig.1. Effects of Casearin X (Cas X 0.7, 1.5 and 3.0 M) on HL-60 leukemia cells after 24 h of incubation. A -Viability determined by trypan blue staining; B -BrdU (5-bromo-2 -deoxyuridine) incorporation; C -Cell death pattern determined by acridine orange and ethidium bromide-staining (AO/EB). Negative control (C) was treated with the vehicle used for diluting the tested substance. Doxorubicin (0.6 M) was used as positive control (D). Results are expressed as mean ± standard error of measurement (S.E.M) from three independent experiments. a p < 0.01 compared to control by ANOVA followed by Student-Newman-Keuls test.
Fig. 2 .2Fig. 2. Morphology of untreated and Casearin X-treated HL-60 cells after 24 h of incubation. A -Control; B -Doxorubicin 0.6 M; C, D and E -Casearin X 0.7, 1.5 and 3.0 M, respectively. Black arrow: chromatin condensation and shrinkage; White arrow: vacuoles in the cytoplasm; White dashed arrow: plasma membrane disintegration. H&E staining. Magnification, ×400.
Fig. 3 .3Fig.3. Flow cytometry analysis of Casearin X (Cas X 0.7, 1.5 and 3.0 M) effects on leukemia HL-60 cells. A -Cell membrane integrity evaluated by the exclusion of propidium iodide; B -DNA fragmentation evaluation by nuclear fluorescence using propidium iodide, Triton X-100 and citrate; C -Mitochondrial transmembrane potential determined by rhodamine 123 retention; D -Activation of caspase-3 and -7 incubated with FLICA TM solution. Negative control (C) was treated with the vehicle used for diluting the tested substance. Doxorubicin (0.6 M) was used as positive control (D). Results are expressed as mean ± standard error of measurement (S.E.M) from three independent experiments. a p < 0.01 compared to control by ANOVA followed by Student-Newman-Keuls test.
Fig. 4 .4Fig. 4. Analyses of phosphatidylserine externalization performed with Annexin V and 7-amino-actinomycin D (7-AAD) in HL-60 cells treated with Casearin X [Cas 0.7 (C), 1.5 (D) and 3.0 M (E)] and determined by flow cytometry after 24 h exposure. Negative control (A) was treated with the vehicle used for diluting the tested substance (Control). Doxorubicin (0.6 M, B) was used as positive control (Dox). Results are expressed as mean ± standard error of measurement (S.E.M) from three independent experiments. a p < 0.01 compared to control by ANOVA followed by Student-Newman-Keuls test.
Fig. 5 .5Fig. 5. Structure of casearins L (1), O (2) and X (3) and (-)-hardwickiic acid (4) isolated from leaves of Casearia sylvestris Swartz (Salicaceae).
