FLAVONOIDS AND ALKALOIDS FROM STRYCHNOS PSE UDOQVINA
From the leaves of Strychnospseudoquina (Loganiaceae), isorhamnetin (1) and a new biflavone (2) named strychnobiflavone were isolated together with the alkaloids diaboline and 1 I-methoxydiaboline.

Strychnospseudoquina St. Hil. (Loganiaceae) is a medium-size tree that grows in the Brazilian "cerrado" where it is well known by the trivial names of "quina do campo" and "falsa quina." It is used in traditional medicine for the treatment of malaria and for the preparation of the so-called "aqua inglesa," largely used in Brazil as a tonic and febrifuge and also to relieve stomach pains ( 1,2).In a previous paper (3) it was demonstrated that no quinine was present in the bark of the roots, of the trunk, and of the branches, but a number of indole alkaloids, mainly nor-dihydrotoxiferine, were present. Later, 1 1-methoxydiaboline and 1 l-methoxy-Wieland-Gumlich aldehyde were found in the bark (4).In the present paper we have investigated the leaves ofS. pseudoquina, which contain both alkaloids and flavonoids.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONGround and dried leaves of S. pseudoquina were exhaustively extracted with EtOH. Part of the residue was reextracted according to the usual procedure for alkaloids. Two main alkaloids were isolated by counter-current distribution (ccd) at discontinuously decreasing p H ( 5 ) and were identified as diaboline and 1 1-methoxydiaboline by direct comparison and analysis of the spectral data. Diaboline and 1 1-methoxydiaboline have been independently found in several Strychnos species of American and African origins (6), but their concomitant occurrence is not common. They are precursors of quaternary alkaloids, such as nordihydrotoxiferine, found in other parts of the plant. In the leaves of this sample, quaternary alkaloids were absent, confirming their usual absence in aerial parts.Another part of the residue was extracted with EtOAc. In this extract, five flavonoids were evident by tlc; the two main ones were isolated by column chromatography. The less polar was identified as isorhamnetin (1) by analysis of chemico-physical and spectral data (7). The second product, 2, m p 2 17-2 19", showed an uv spectrum similar to that of isorhamnetin (1) and analogous shifts after addition of AlCI, and AlCl,/HCI. 'H-nmr spectra of 2 (in Me,CO-d6) showed the following sets of signals: (a) two methoxy groups (6 3.82 and 3.63); (b) two doublets (6 5.84 and 6.10,J=2 Hz) and a sharp singlet (6 6.26)  and (d) two chelated hydroxy groups (6 12.6 and 12.8), indicating a possible isorhamnetin (3). Each of the side phenyl rings appeared to be substituted by two phenolic hydroxyls, ortho to each other. The signals of two methoxy groups were also present and, by their chemical shifts, they seemed ortho, ortho' disubstituted; methoxy carbon atoms ortho, ortho' disubstituted resonate at lower fields (-60 ppm), whereas ordinary OMe groups are usually found between 55-57 ppm (8). In 2 , OMe groups could be assigned to position 3 (rings I-C and 11-C) in consideration of the chemical shifts of carbon atoms of rings A and by comparison of 3 with literature data (9).Thus, the structure of a biflavonoid methoxylated at psition 3 could be assigned to compound 2 , to which we propose the name of strychnobiflavone.By reaction wih ethereal CH,N2, the hexamethyl derivative of 2 (4), m p 233-234", was obtained.The ms spectrum of 4 showed, besides the molecular peak at m/z 7 14 (47%), the M+-1 peak characteristic of the fragmentation pattern of flavonols. The most significant ions were at m/z 357 (30) corresponding to either the doubly charged molecular ion, M + + , or the fission product hU2 '+, and at m/z 167 (15) and 165 (58) attributable to ions related to I-A and 11-B rings, respectively, by analogy with other flavonoids (7).The 'H-nmr spectrum of 4 in CDCI, showed two sets of methoxy groups (three at -4.0 pprn and five between 3.4 and 3.8 ppm) partially overlapped, whereas in Me2CO-d6 all eight signals were located between 6 3.56 and 4.00. Two low-field signals were present (6 13.20 and 13.54, exchangeable with D,O), and they could again be assigned to the two hydroxy groups in position 5 (rings I-A and 11-A) chelated by the carboxyl groups at position 4 (rings I-C and 11-C). The aromatic signals were now clearly separated, and on the basis of their multiplicities the first site of attachment of the two monomers could be assigned to position 2' of one of the benzene rings. The 13C-nmr spectrum of 4 , in comparison with that of 2 , showed as the main difference, aside from the effects due to the methylation, the pattern of the aromatic substitution.Finally, by reaction of 2 with K2C03/Me2S04 the octamethyl derivative ( 5 , mp 269-27 1' ) was obtained in order to methylate also the hydroxyl groups in position 5 (rings I-A and 11-A), and thus assign the second coupling site. Cmr data of 5, in comparison with those of 4 , showed the effect of methylation at C(5) in accordance with reported data for flavonoids (9), i.e., strong shielding of C( 4), deshielding of C(3) and shielding of C(2). Two signals of the three aromatic methynes of A rings appeared shielded by the effect of the methylation, assigning the second site of attachment to the 8 position. As an independent confirmation, no additional OMe peaks appeared at -60 ppm and seven OMe peaks were present at higher field.Thus the structure of 1-5, 1-7, 1-3', 1-4',  biflavone was assigned to strychnobiflavone (2). Only in a chromatographic study on African species was the presence of flavonoids and related compounds in Strychnos previously reported ( 10). Therefore, the finding of flavonoids in S. pseudoquina is interesting from a chemotaxonomic standpoint. EXPERIMENTAL GENERAL EXPERIMENTAL.-A Craig-Post apparatus (200 stages, 10: 10 ml, upper and lower phase) was used for ccd. 'H-nmr and "C-nmr spectra were recorded with a Varian XL 100 spectrometer (using TMS as internal reference). Ms spectra were registered on a LKB 9000 S spectrometer.PLANT MATERIAL.-hVeS of S. pseudoqnina were collected near Brasilia, Brazil, and identified at the Universidade Federal de Alagoas:Maceio, Brazil, where a voucher specimen (no. SPQ 8 1) is deposited.The material (3 kg) was dried at 40". powdered, and exhaustively extracted with EtOH to yield, after evaporation of the solvent, a residue that amounted to -12% of the starting material. attributed to the protons of A rings, showing that one of the ligation sites was in the 6 or 8 position; (c) the other signals in the aromatic region showed a trisubstituted and a tetrasubstituted system pertinent to I-B and 11-B rings;
ISOLATION A N D IDENTIFICATION OF THE ALKALOIDS.-Part of the residue (50 g) was extracted with a 2% HOAc until a negative Dragendorff reaction occurred. The aqueous extract was made alkaline by adding NaHCO, and extracted twice wirh CHCl;. The organic phase, after evaporation of the solvent,
Journal of Natural Products
