Comparison of % TNC in Cotton Stems by the Methods Communications
with ten replications showed a high degree of accuracy.Ten replicate analyses of cotton plant samples with 10% to 15% TNC gave standard deviations of 0.28 and 0.14, respectively. The same degree of accuracy was obtained when analyzing different parts of cotton plants and lyophilized cactus pads (Opuntia, s.P.) harvested at different seasons of the year. These materials ranged from 10% to 70% TNC. The authors' technique can be conducted for about one-tenth the cost of other methods in use. A complete analysis can be performed in 24 h elapsed time, while other techniques require 3 to 4 days. It should also be noted that a minimum of glassware is required. This represents a saving of initial cost and routine glasswarewashing time. It is especially noteworthy that the detergent action of the Teles' reagent allows effective cleansing of the Folin tubes by simple rinsing four times with distilled water. In addition, it also allows the use of a flow-through curvette. The reduced number of operations make the technique more accurate and less tedious.The reagents used, in addition to being less expensive, can be prepared with distilled water with no need for deionizers or other water retreatment. The substitution of dinitrosalicylic acid (Summer and Somer, 1949) for Teles' reagent gave similar results. One technician easily analyzed an average of 96 samples in 24-h elapsed time.In case the laboratory is equipped with only an ordinary centrifuge (maximum speed ca. 1500 rpm), the use of 4 mL of a 2% solution of neutral lead acetate (only the neutral salt) in water instead of 4 mL of distilled water before centrifugation also gives a clear supernatant. This amount of lead salt does not interfere with the analysis as was demonstrated in the course of the experiment with comparative analyses. The lead precipitation also would allow aliquot filtration, but the authors avoided this operation since it increases time and cost.
Anise-Like Flavor of Croton aff. zehntneri Pax et Hoffm.Estragole, the major constituent of the essential oil of Croton aff. zehntneri, family Euphorbiaceae, occurs together with minor quantities of camphor, anethole, isoborneol, caryophyllene, y-elemene, safrol, methylisoeugenol, n-heptadecane, and n-eicosane. These compounds are being reported for the first time in the genus Croton. Fifteen predominant volatile constituents of the oil were analyzed by GC-MS and identified. The oil has a typical pleasant odor reminiscent of anise (Pimpinella a n i s u m L.)The genus Croton is largely disperse in the semiarid lands of Brazilian Northeast and includes many species that produce essential oils with pleasant odors.This report deals with the examination of the volatile constituents of Croton aff. a Authentic samples of a-pinene, P-pinene, and caryophyllene were supplied by Dragoco S. A. (Sa0 Paulo, Brasil); isoborneol, 1,8-cineol, and trans-anethole from Farbejtf(New York); myrcene, camphor, estragole, methyleugenol, methylisoeugenol, safrole, and 7-elemene from the author's collection. ' Comparison with reference spectrum (Stenhagen e t al., 1974). N o authentic samples available.equipped with a stainless steel column (3 mm X 1.5 m) packed with 1.5% OV-101 on Chromosorb W programmed from 50-250 "C, at a rate of 4 "C/min, using N2 as the carrier gas.Preparative GLC was carried out using a modified FID chromatograph (splitter 1OO:l) with a 9 mm x 6.5 m aluminum column packed with 20% OV-210 on Chromosorb W.GC-MS separation was carried out with a glass column (3 mm X 1.5 m) packed with 3% OV-1 on Chromosorb W coupled to a quadrupole mass spectrometer operated at 70 eV.Infrared spectra were obtained using liquid films. NMR spectra were run in CCl,, using a 60 MHz instrument and TMS as internal standard. Double resonance experiments were realized with the same above conditions at room temperature.Extraction of the Oils. The plant was collected in Araripe-Cearb and transported to the laboratory in an air-conditioned vehicle. Finely ground material was steam distilled in a modified steam generator (Craveiro et al., 1976); the oils were dried with anhydrous Na2SO4 and sealed in all-glass vials under Nz.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONThe essential oils were obtained by steam distillation of the leaves, stems, and wood in yields of 0.7, 2.5, and 0.273, respectively. The chemical composition of the above oils is described in Table I.The separations were performed initially with a GLC analytical column, followed by analysis with a GC-MS system. Whenever possible, preparative GLC was used to allow NMR and IR confirmations. Previous work in the essential oils of the Euphorbiaceae family, genus Croton (Guenther, 1950;Bracho and Crowley, 1966;Craveiro et al., 1976) do not make any reference to the present species which is native to the Brazilian Northeast.The presence of estragole, camphor, anethole, isoborneol, caryophyllene, y-elemene, safrole, methylisoeugenol, nheptadecane, and n-eicosane is related for the first time in the genus as far as we know. Estragole imparts to the oil the characteristic flavor similar to anise seed oil. Methyleugenol, a potent anhestesic (Carlini et al., 1976), should be responsible for the pharmacological activity of the plant infusions.Table I .It e h n t n e r i (canelinha) family Euphorbiaceae collected in the state of CearB. The in-fusion of the leaves is used by local people as a beverage in place of coffee and as a remedy for stomachache and insomnia. Volatile Constituents of Croton aff. zehntneriEXPERIMENTAL SECTION Analytical GLC was performed on a FID instrument 0 1978 American Chemical Society 0021-856 1 /78/1426-0772$01 .OO/O Communications J. Agric
. Food Chem., Vol. 26, No. 3, 1978 773CompoundaLeaves, %Stems, %Wood, %IdentificationaPinenetMS, GLC@-Pinene Myrcene1t t3MS, GLC MS, IR, GLC1,8-Cineole22MS, IR, GLCCamphortMS, GLCIsoborneoltMS, GLCEstragole6 1569MS, RMP, GLCtrans-AnetholetMS, GLCMethyleugenol53434MS, RMP, IR, GLCMe thylisoeugenolt26MS, GLCSafrole7MS, IR, GLCCaryophy llene258MS, GLCy-Elemene112MS, GLCn-HeptadecanetMSn -EicosanetMSUnidentified241 6
