Geranylation of benzoic acid derivatives by enzymatic extracts from Piper crassinervium (Piperaceae)
The ability to carry out geranylations on aromatic substrates using enzymatic extracts from the leaves of Piper crassinervium (Piperaceae) was evaluated. A literature analysis pointed out its importance as a source of prenylated bioactive molecules. The screening performed on aromatic acceptors (benzoic acids, phenols and phenylpropanoids) including geranyl diphosphate as prenyl donor, showed the biotransformation of the 3,4-dihydroxybenzoic acid by the crude extract, and the p-hydroxybenzoic acid by both the microsomal fraction and the crude extract, after treating leaves with glucose. The analysis of the products allowed the identification of C-and O-geranylated derivatives, and the protease (subtilisin and pepsin) inhibition performed on the O-geranylated compounds showed weak inhibition. Electrophoretic profiles indicated the presence of bands/spots among 56-58 kDa and pI 6-7, which are compatible with prenyltransferases. These findings show that P. crassinervium could be considered as a source of extracts with geranyltransferase activity to perform biotransformations on aromatic substrates.

IntroductionBiotransformations are chemical reactions catalyzed by cells, organs or enzymes. They are different from biosynthesis, where complex products are assembled from simple substrates by whole cells, organs or organisms. Plant enzyme biocatalysts can be utilized to introduce new structural motifs on existing drugs expecting to improve their bioactivity, pharmacokinetic profile and also for the production of new drugs (Giri et al., 2001).So far, natural products bearing one or more prenyl groups have been isolated predominantly from higher plants. These compounds, originated from several natural product classes, often hold antimicrobial, antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, antiviral, and anticancer activities (Epifano et al., 2008). Since the prenylation of small aromatic molecules is a pivotal step in the biosynthesis of many natural products, the access to prenylation reaction catalysts might represent an advantageous short-cut to obtain prenylated aromatic compounds (Yazaki et al., 2001;Haagena et al., 2007).Aromatic geranyltransferases are a sub-class of prenyltransferases that catalyzes C-geranylations on several aromatic substrates. Several examples of new aromatic prenyltransferases have been reported from bacteria as soluble monomeric biocatalysts, with a relatively high promiscuity for aromatic substrates. In spite of the lack of a full elucidation of substrate-and regiospecificity, these enzymes were successfully employed to carry out either C-or O-prenylations of several compounds (Epifano et al., 2008). In plants, aromatic geranyltransferases are membrane-bound proteins, showing a strict substrate specificity for the endogenous prenyl donor groups (e.g. DMAPP, GPP, etc.), although they may accept a variety of aromatic compounds as acceptors of the prenyl moieties (Yazaki et al., 2001;Kuzuyama et al., 2005). There are few examples in which prenyltransferases have been isolated and characterized from plants (Mühlenweg et al., 1998). Therefore, biotransformations using plant enzymatic extracts enriched in prenyltransferase activity could be used as an alternative to obtain either known or new bioactive compounds.Piperaceae family is a basal angiosperm family, comprising more than 4000 species. Its species are chemically very rich and major classes of compounds described include phenylpropanoids (Orjala et al., 1993), lignan/neolignans (Parmar et al., 1997;Benevides et al., 1999;Martins et al., 2003;Felippe et al., 2008), pyrones (Singh, 1992), aliphatic and aromatic amides (Alécio et al., 1998;Silva et al., 2002), alkaloids (Dodson et al., 2000), polyketides (Cheng et al., 2003), benzoic acid derivatives (Bergamo et al., 2005;Morandim et al., 2005) and chromenes (Lago et al., 2004;Morandim et al., 2005;Salazar et al., 2005). Belonging to this 0960-8524/$ -see front matter Ó 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. doi:10.1016/j.biortech.2010.01.041 family, Piper is one of the most abundant genera, with approximately 2000 species (Wanke et al., 2007). Piper crassinervium species accumulates antifungal, trypanocidal and antioxidant Cgeranylated metabolites derived from both benzoic acid and phydroquinone (Danelutte et al., 2003;Yamaguchi et al., 2006;Lopes et al., 2008).In spite of the knowledge on the chemical constituents and the biological potential of Piperaceae species, no comprehensive study has been made in order to survey such bioactive metabolites within the members of the family.Here we present a compilation that points out to the importance of Piper genus as a source of bioactive compounds and, particularly, of P. crassinervium as an enzyme source to perform geranylations on aromatic substrates. We report the biotransformation (i.e. the geranylation) of both the p-hydroxybenzoic and 3,4-dihydroxybenzoic acids carried out by the enzymatic extracts from the leaves of P. crassinervium besides the full characterization of two products as geranyl ester derivatives in addition to the characterization of one major product formed by biotransformation of the 3,4-dihydroxybenzoic acid as a C-geranylated derivative. Additionally, the inhibitory activity on HIV-like proteases was determined for the products as well as the electrophoretic characterization of catalytically active protein fractions by using SDS PAGE and 2-DE.
Methods
Literature survey and analysis'Piperaceae' and 'activity' were used as key words to perform a search in the available databases (e.g. Science Direct and ACS databases). All the obtained information was uploaded in a table according to genus, species, type of compound and biological activity reported (see the Electronic Annex in the online version of this article). Typical software Excel 2007 Ò (Microsoft Corporation) was used to analyse and plot the obtained information.
Plant materialFresh leaves of P. crassinervium were collected from adults specimens cultivated from seeds under greenhouse conditions at the Institute of Chemistry, UNESP, Araraquara, SP, Brazil. Plant material was authenticated by Dr. Guillermo Paredes (Universidad Pedro Ruiz Gallo-Peru) and the voucher specimen (Kato-0084) was deposited at the Herbarium of Instituto de Botânica, São Paulo, SP, Brazil.Incubation into b-D-glucose of young leaves from P. crassinervium. Leaves freshly excised from an adult plant were placed separately in 1.5 ml Eppendorf Ò tubes and each administrated 100 ll from a 10% solution of b-D-glucose in water at 25 °C for 72 h (Bergamo et al., 2005).
Synthesis and purification of geranyl diphosphate (GPP)In a 100 ml round bottom flask 1 mmol of geraniol was mixed with 6 mmol of trichloroacetonitrile. Bis-triethylammonium phosphate (2.4 mmol in 20 ml of acetonitrile) was added drop-wise to the mixture over a period of 6 h, at room temperature under continuous stirring (Cornforth and Popják, 1969). The mixture was further stirred for 12 h at room temperature and then, the reaction was stopped by dilution with 100 ml of ethyl ether, followed by extraction with 30 ml of NH 4 OH 0.1 M (3Â). The basic solution was then re-extracted with 30 ml of ethyl ether (3Â) and evaporated under reduced pressure. The GPP was purified by precipitation in acetonitrile at À20 °C overnight, compared with a commercial sample using TLC on cellulose (isopropanol/25% aqueous ammonia/water 50:25:25) and characterized by 1 H, 13 C and 31 P NMR. 1 H NMR (500 MHz, D 2 O): d 4.44 (H-1, d, J = 7.0 Hz), 5.41 (H-2, t, J = 7.0 Hz), 2.02-2.15 (H-4 and H-5, m), 5.17 (H-6, m), 1.59 (-CH 3 8, s), 1.65 (-CH 3 9, s), 1.66 (-CH 3 10, s). 13 C NMR (125 MHz, D 2 O): d 63.0 (C-1), 124.3 (C-2), 143.0 (C-3), 46.9 (C-4), 25.8 (C-5), 120.0 (C-6), 133.9 (C-7), 25.0 (C-8), 17.2 (C-9) and 15.8 (C-10). 31 P NMR (H 3 PO 4 , 202 MHz, D 2 O): d À9.75 (P-1), À10.40 (P-2).2.4. Synthesis, purification and characterization of the O-geranyl derivatives of the 3,4-dihydroxybenzoic acid To a stirred solution of the 3,4-dihydroxibenzoic acid (2 mmol) in dry DMF (10 ml), anhydrous potassium carbonate (6 mmol) was added and the solution stirred for 30 min at 40 °C under nitrogen atmosphere (Pisco et al., 2006). Geranyl bromide (4 mmol) was added drop-wise and the resulting mixture was heated and stirred at the same temperature for 8 h under nitrogen atmosphere. The mixture was then poured into cold water (50 ml) added with 0.1% of HOAc, and extracted with CHCl 3 (100 ml) and EtOAc (100 ml). The EtOAc layer was washed, dried with Na 2 SO 4 , and evaporated under reduced pressure and the residue was submitted to column chromatography [Silica-gel 60 (230-400 mesh), isocratic elution with Hex-EtOAc (60:40)] yielding five fractions. Fraction 2 was characterized as compound 3, fraction 4 as compound 4 and fraction 5 as compound 5. The purified products were characterized by 1 H, 13 C NMR, DEPT, gHMBC, gHMQC and ESI-MS (Fig. 4, Table 1).
Synthesis, purification and characterization of the O-geranyl derivatives of the p-hydroxybenzoic acidThe p-hydroxybenzoic acid (1 mmol) dissolved in 5 ml of THF was added to a slurry of 5 g of Al 2 O 3 neutral in ether (1 ml) (Glüsenkamp and Büchi, 1986). The solvent was evaporated and geranyl bromide (3 mmol) in ether-hexane (30:70) was added. After stirring during 4 days, Al 2 O 3 was filtered off and washed with 1% HOAc in EtOAc. The combined organic layer was evaporated and the products were purified using column chromatography [Silicagel 60 (230-400 mesh), gradient elution with Hex 100%, 80:20;50:50)], yielding 7 fractions. From fraction 3 it was characterized the geranyl ester derivative (6), whereas the geranyl ether derivative (7) was purified from fraction 4 by subsequent column chromatography , isocratic elution with ]. The purified products were characterized by 1 H, 13 C NMR, DEPT, gHMBC, gHMQC and ESI-MS (Table 2, Fig. 5).
Protein extractionLeaves of P. crassinervium were harvested from an adult specimen and maintained in liquid N 2 . The frozen leaves (10 g) were triturated in a mortar with addition of 35% polyvinylpolypyrrolidone (PVPP), 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) and 1 mM ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) in 30 ml of 100 mM potassium phosphate (KPi, pH 8). The homogenate was stirred slowly by 15 min in ice bath, filtered on gauze and centrifuged at 13,000 rpm for 10 min to obtain the supernatant (crude enzymatic extract), which was then submitted to protein determination, activity assay and electrophoretic analysis.
Microsomal fractionThe protocol was performed according to Mühlenweg et al. (1998) with minimal modifications. The supernatant (20 ml) obtained as described in Section 2.6 was subjected to ultracentrifuga-tion at 39,000 rpm for 1 h. The resulting pellet was resuspended in 10 ml of 0.1 M Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), containing 2 mM DTT, 1 M KCl and 10% (w/v) glycerol, and stirred on ice for 30 min. The suspension was subjected to ultracentrifugation as described above. The supernatant was discarded, and the tube was carefully rinsed with 0.05 M Tris-HCl (pH 7.5). The pellet was then resuspended in 10 ml of 0.05 M Tris-HCl (pH 6.5), containing 2 mM DTT, 2 M KCl, 10% (w/v) glycerol and 4 mM 3-[(3-cholamidopropyl)dimethylammonium]-2-hydroxy-1-propanesulphonate (CHAPSO), and stirred on ice for 30 min. The suspension was ultracentrifuged as described above, and the desired proteins were recovered as supernatant, which was passed through a Sephadex G-25 column (9.0 cm long, 1.0 cm i.d.), previously equilibrated with the 0.05 M Tris-HCl (pH 7.8) containing 1.5 mM CHAPSO, 2 mM DTT and 10% (w/v) glycerol. The eluate was submitted to protein determination, activity assay and electrophoretic analysis.
Protein determinationThe protein determination was performed by the Bradford modified method, using bovine serum albumin (BSA) as standard (Stoscheck, 1990).
Detection of the geranyltransferase activityThe reaction mixture (100 ll) containing 100 mM KPi (pH 8.0), 10 mM of precursors, 10 mM GPP, 10 mM MgCl 2 (or MnCl 2 ) and 65 ll of the proteic extract was incubated under stirring for 60 min at 35 °C. The reaction was stopped with the addition of 5 ll of 6 M HCl and extracted with 150 ll of EtOAc. After vortex and centrifugation, the organic layer was evaporated, the residue dissolved in MeOH (100 ll) and analysed by HPLC-UV, using a Phenomenex GEMINI Ò column (5 lm C 18 110 Å, 250 Â 4.6 mm) at a flow rate of 1 ml/min. An isocratic condition (25 min) consisted of 70% acetonitrile and 0.1% aqueous HOAc (30%), with detection at 254 and 280 nm. Injection volume: 50 ll. For each reaction, two negative controls, which consisted of: (1) enzymatic extract + buffer and (2) precursor + divalent cation + GPP + buffer, were carried out simultaneously. Each experiment was performed in duplicate.
Sodium dodecylsulphate-polyacrylamide electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE)The SDS PAGE was performed according to the supplier information (GE Healthcare Ò ). The 12% polyacrylamide gels were stained with AgNO 3 . The relative molecular mass (M r ) of denatured proteins was estimated using the LabImage 1D Ò software calibrated with low molecular weight standards (phosphorylase b, sericalbumin, ovalbumin, carbonic anhydrase and trypsin inhibitor, with 97.4, 66.2, 45.0, 31.0, 21.5 and 14.4 kDa, respectively).
Two-dimensional electrophoresis (2-DE)The 2-DE with immobilized pH gradients (IPG-Dalt) was carried out according to the supplier information (GE Healthcare Ò ). The IPG strips (13 cm) were rehydrated for 14-18 h with sample proteins previously treated with the Clean-Up Kit (GE Healthcare Ò )Table 1 1 H NMR data (500 MHz, J = Hz, CDCl 3 ), 13 C NMR data (125 MHz, CDCl 3 ) and gHMBC correlations observed for compounds 3-5.O O O R 1 R 2 R 1 = ; R 2 = R 3 = H ; R 2 = R 1 = R 3 = H 2 3 5 6 1' 3' 7' 9'' 10'' 3 4 O R 3 ; R 3 = R 1 = R 2 = H
5. in an Immobiline DryStrip Reswelling Tray. First dimension isoelectric focusing (IEF) was carried out in an Ettan IPGphor II Manifold applying a manufacturer's standard protocol. The second dimension was performed on a vertical (14 Â 16 cm) 12% polyacrylamide SDS gel, in a SE 600 Ruby System, 45 mA/gel and 600 V. Each gel was stained with silver according to the Silver Staining Protocol (Amersham Biosciences Ò ).2.12. Inhibition of the protease activity 2.12.1. Reagents Pepsin was from porcine gastric mucous. Recombinant Type VIII Subtilisin Carlsberg, Arg-Glu-(EDANS)-Ser-Gln-Asn-Tyr-Pro-Ile-Val-Gln-Lys-(DABCYL)-Arg fluorogenic substrate (EDANS-DABCYL) and dimethylsulphoxide (DMSO) spectrophotometric grade, were from Sigma-Aldrich, São Paulo, Brazil.
Protease activity assayThe assays were performed in triplicate. Compounds were dissolved in DMSO and diluted in 0.1 M sodium phosphate (pH 7.5) for subtilisin and 0.1 M sodium acetate (pH 4.4) for pepsin, respectively. Warfarin and dicoumarol were used as positive controls (Thaisrivongs et al., 1994;Pochet et al., 2000). Samples and standard inhibitors (1 lg/ml) were pre-incubated with subtilisin (37 nM) or pepsin (1.7 nM) for 1 h, and then transferred to a black opaque microplate to be tested. The substrate EDANS-DABCYL (2 lM) was prepared in the specific buffer for each protease. In the control assay only protease and substrate were used. Proteases were prepared in the day of the experiment and the tests were performed for each one separately. Readings were made using 360 nm (excitation) and 460 nm (emission) filters during 7 min, with 1 min intervals, at 37 °C (Hirata et al., 2005). The fluorescence intensity was used to calculate the % of inhibition as follows:%I ¼ 100 À ½ðDFs=DFpÞ Ã 100 where, DFs and DFp are the difference between the first and last readings for the sample test and the control, respectively.Fluorescence bioassay data were collected with a multidetection microplate reader Synergy™ HT and analysed using the KC4 software (Bio-Tek Ò Instruments, Inc.) and Microsoft Windows XP Ò .
Results and discussionPrenylation is a chemical or enzymatic addition of a hydrophobic side chain to an accepting molecule (another terpenoid molecule, an aromatic compound, a protein, etc.). In particular, the prenylation of aromatic secondary metabolites plays a critical role in the biosynthesis of a wide range of molecules exerting valuable pharmacological effects. Several examples can be found in phylogenetically different classes of living organisms, from bacteria across mammals to plants (Epifano et al., 2008).Phytochemical investigations carried out on Piper species have led to the isolation of many bioactive natural products. The analysis of the distribution of these bioactive compounds (by genus, type of compound and bioactivity) in the Piperaceae family was performed looking at, particularly, the importance of prenylated natural products within that universe. The search was performed using 'Piperaceae' and 'activity', as key words, in the available web databases. This search resulted in 656 entries (see the Electronic Annex in the online version of this article), which were analysed and discussed here. The analysis was performed considering the botanical classification as provided in the publications.Regarding the distribution of bioactive compounds reported within genera, a predominance of Piper genus over Peperomia genus was observed, representing 83%. In spite of the large number of species belonging to Peperomia genus (about 1700 species versus 2000 from Piper) (Wanke et al., 2007), it only contributes with 15% of the total reports published. Such differences can be accounted for the fact that Piper species have been more exhaustively H NMR data (500 MHz, J = Hz, CDCl 3 ) for compounds 6 and 7. 13 C NMR data (125 MHz, CDCl 3 ) and gHMBC correlations for compound 6.  studied partially due to their wide occurrence and biomass availability (Fig. 1, Electronic Annex). Among Piper genus, 44 species were subjected to phytochemical or bioactivity investigations, being P. cubeba the most intensively studied with near 8%, followed by P. longum and P. aduncum with 7%, P. methysticum and P. tuberculatum with 6%, P. sanctum, P. nigrum and P. crassinervium with 5% (Fig. 1). Only nine studies with Peperomia species were found, with P. duclouxii (28%), P. dindygulensis (18%) and P. galioides (13%), being the three mentioned most frequently.O O O R 1 R 2 R 1 = ; R 2 = H ; R 2 = R 1 = H 2 3Considering the type of compounds, they were grouped based on their structural characteristics, as follows: ALK (alkaloids and other substances bearing nitrogen), LG (lignans, neolignans and related compounds), PCT (polyketides), TP (terpenoids), BPPR (prenylated benzopyrans), HQPR (prenylated hydroquinones), BPR (prenylated benzoic acid derivatives), FLV (flavonoids, chalcones and related compounds), B (benzene derivatives), BP (benzopyranes), AG (fatty acids), FP (phenylpropanoids), E (epoxides), ET (steroids), CHX (cyclohexanic derivatives), KLN (kavalactones, pyrones, and related compounds) and NPT (naphthalene derivatives), (Fig. 2A). Their distribution shows the prevalence of nitrogenated substances (ALK), lignoids (LG) and flavonoids (FLV) in Piper spe-cies. Nevertheless some differences could be observed in Peperomia, where LG (lignoids) and BPPR (prenylated benzopyrans) were the most abundant (Fig. 2A).Regarding biological activities, the grouping was performed considering the biological target in order to simplify as follows: snc (involving activities related to central nervous system, such as sedative and relaxant), tryp (antiprotozoal activity against Trypanosoma, Plasmodium, Leishmania), cyt (cytotoxicity and related activities), atb (antimicrobial, such as antibacterial and antifungal), can (anticancer activity, related to cytotoxic but more specifically targeted), insec (insecticidal or repellent activity, such as antimosquito or ant), aox (antioxidant activity, such as DPPH), enz (inhibiroty activity against several enzymes), aai (anti-inflammatory activity), acoag (anticoagulant, such as inhibition of platelet aggregation), iger (allelophatic activity), photo (photo-protecting activity), cic (cicatrizing activity) and avir (antiviral activity). The obtained distribution shows that Piper genus is mostly related to antibacterial and antiprotozoal activities, followed by anti-inflammatory and enzymatic inhibitory activities, while Peperomia appears to be mostly related to cytotoxic and antiprotozoal activities. Only Pothomorphe genus showed some relationship with antiviral activity (Fig. 2B). LG (lignans, neolignans and related compounds), PCT (polyketides), TP (terpenoids), BPPR (prenylated benzopyrans), HQPR (prenylated hydroquinones), BPR (prenylated benzoic acid derivatives), FLV (flavonoids, chalcones and related compounds), B (benzene derivatives), BP (benzopyrans), AG (fatty acids), FP (phenylpropanoids), E (epoxides), ET (steroids), CHX (cyclohexanic derivatives), KLN (kavalactones, pyrones, and related compounds) and NPT (naphthalene derivatives). (B) Distribution observed by biological activity groups for each genus reported: snc (related to central nervious system, such as sedative and relaxant), tryp (antiprotozoal activity against Trypanosoma, Plasmodium, Leishmania), cyt (cytotoxicity and related), atb (antimicrobial, such as antibacterial and antifungal), can (anticancer activity, related to cytotoxic but more specifically targeted), insec (insecticidal or repellent activity, such as anti-mosquito or ant), aox (antioxidant activity, such as DPPH), enz (inhibiroty activity against several enzymes), aai (antiinflammatory activity), acoag (anticoagulant, such as inhibition of platelet aggregation), iger (allelophatic activity), photo (photo-protecting activity), cic (cicatrizing activity) and avir (antiviral activity) (for details see the Electronic Annex). About prenylated natural products, i.e., all the compounds bearing one or more prenyl, geranyl, farnesyl or geranylgeranyl moieties as substituents in their basic structures, open or cycled (BP, BPR, BPPR and HQPR), they could be found in Peperomia, Pothomorphe and in Piper species (Fig. 2). In addition, they are mostly related to antimicrobial (atb), insecticidal (insec) and antioxidant activity (aox), being the prenylated benzoic acid derivatives (BPR) from Piper species, the group with the most biological activities reported (Fig. 3).The analysis for the occurrence of major secondary compounds pointed out that Piper species could be considered as an important source of prenylated compounds and thus a source for further studies of prenyltransferase activity. The two species P. crassinervium and P. aduncum accounted for 11% of the total number of species in which bioactive substances have been reported for this genus and can be considered good candidates for further investigation on bioactive prenylated metabolites (Fig. 1, Electronic Annex).Considering the literature survey performed here as well as our previous experience on both bioactivity and biosynthetic studies of prenylated compounds from some Piper species, P. crassinervium was selected for further studies (Lopes et al., 2008). This species accumulates two C-geranylated metabolites derived from benzoic acid [4-hydroxy-3-E-(3 0 ,7 0 -dimethyl-1 0 -oxo-2 0 ,6 0 -octadienyl)benzoic acid (1)] and from 1,4-benzenediol [(1,4-dihydroxy-2-E-(3 0 ,7 0 -dimethyl-1 0 -oxo-2 0 ,6 0 -octadienyl)benzene(2)], which showed antifungal, antioxidant and trypanocidal activities (Fig. 1) (Danelutte et al., 2003;Yamaguchi et al., 2006;Lopes et al., 2008).A screening for the prenylation activity with the crude enzymatic extract from fresh leaves of P. crassinervium plus geranyl pyrophosphate (GPP) as the prenyl donor, a divalent cation (MgCl 2 or MnCl 2 ) and several aromatic substrates (p-hydroxybenzoic acid, 3,4-dihydroxybenzoic acid, p-hydroxybenzaldehyde, phenol, phydroquinone, caffeic acid, o-and p-coumaric acids) was initially performed. Neither the p-hydroxybenzoic acid nor the p-hydroquinone (the two theoretically natural precursors of compounds 1 and 2) was biotransformed, whilst the reaction with the 3,4-dihydroxybenzoic acid led to the formation of products, as observed in the chromatographic profile, suggesting a biotransformation reaction when compared with that of the negative control. The reaction was consistently reproducible and the product was analysed by HPLC-UV-MS showing an intense peak at t R : 13.1 min with k max at 280 nm besides some minor compounds between t R : 7-9 min (Fig. 4). The fact that the 3,4-dihydroxybenzoic acid could be biotransformed is interesting because no prenylated natural products bearing a catechol moiety have been isolated from P. crassinervium previously.The characterization of the biotransformation products was performed by the analysis of their UV-Vis and MS or tandem MS-MS (ESI negative mode) spectra, as well as by comparison with synthetic compounds prepared for this purpose: the 3,4-dihydroxybenzoic acid geranyl ester (compound 3), the 4-O-geranyl-3-hydroxybenzoic acid (compound 4) and the 3-O-geranyl-4hydroxybenzoic acid (compound 5) (Table 1).Regarding the minor products detected (chromatographic peaks detected at 254 nm with t R between 7 and 9 min), their mass (MS) spectra were investigated and compared to those of the synthetic compounds 3-5. This analysis and the comparison of the chromatographic profiles, UV (A max 258 and 295 nm) and MS spectra ([MÀH] À = 289, [MÀC 10 H 17 ] À = 153 and [MÀC 10 H 17 ÀCO 2 ] À = 109) with those of the negative controls (see Section 2.9) allowed the determination of the product eluted at t R : 8.6 min as the geranyl ester of the 3,4-dihydroxybenzoic acid (3) (Fig. 4).The compound eluted at t R : 13.1 min displayed a [MÀH] À = 303, which under subsequent fragmentation by MS-MS, gave rise to the fragment ion m/z = 259, indicating the loss of a CO 2 molecule (Fig. 4). Considering that the addition of one geranyl moiety to this aromatic core produces a molecule with MW = 290, an additional oxidation at the geranylic chain was suggested on the basis of the MW = 304 observed, compatible with additional 14 unities to the MW = 290. This suggestion was based on the observation of the oxidation pattern of the isolated metabolites 1 and 2, which have a carbonyl carbon at their geranyl moieties (Fig. 1). The position of the geranyl moiety could be proposed as a C-(at the aromatic ring) instead of an O-substitution (at a phenol group), due to the lack of the fragment at m/z = 153 in the MS-MS spectrum (Fig. 4). The position of the oxidation at the geranyl moiety was assumed to be at C-5 0 , due to the observation of the fragment ions at m/z = 203 and 159, which could result from a McLafferty-type rearrangement (Fig. 4) (Grossert et al., 2006).Since plant prenyltransferases are mostly membrane-associated enzymes, an additional protocol on the crude extract was performed to obtain a microsomal fraction (Mühlenweg et al., 1998). The process was monitored by electrophoresis SDS PAGE and 2-DE, and the microsomal fraction was evaluated for its geranyltransferase activity having p-hydroquinone, p-hydroxybenzoic and 3,4-dihydroxybenzoic acids as aromatic acceptors. No products were detected when p-hydroquinone and 3,4-dihydroxybenzoic acid were used as substrates. Nevertheless, the analysis indicated that the p-hydroxybenzoic acid was biotransformed yielding a new product as a weak chromatographic peak (t R : 13.6 min), absent in the negative controls. The chromatographic profile of the obtained product was compared with those of the endogenous (1) and synthetic (6 and 7, Table 2) compounds, suggesting that the product of this biotransformation could be an Ogeranylated derivative (Fig. 5).Previous studies carried out by our research group with leaves of P. crassinervium have demonstrated that compounds 1 and 2 were biosynthesized de novo after incubation for three days with glucose (unpublished results). Consequently, a protocol of feeding glucose by pre-incubation of fresh leaves from P. crassinervium with a 10% aqueous solution was applied to enhance the expression of the geranyltransferase activity.Subsequent to the enzymatic reaction, the synthesis of the expected product was enhanced, being possible to identify it as the geranylic ester of the p-hydroxybenzoic acid 6 both in the crude extract and in the microsomal fraction (Fig. 5). This result is Fig. 3. Distribution of prenylated bioactive metabolites by genera within Piperaceae family. BPPR (prenylated benzopyrans), HQPR (prenylated hydroquinones), BPR (prenylated benzoic acid derivatives), BP (benzopyrans), tryp (antiprotozoal activity against Trypanosoma, Plasmodium, Leishmania), cyt (cytotoxicity and related), atb (antimicrobial, such as antibacterial and antifungal), can (anticancer activity, related to cytotoxic but more specifically targeted), insec (insecticidal or repellent activity, such as anti-mosquito or ant), aox (antioxidant activity, such as DPPH), enz (inhibiroty activity against several enzymes), aai (anti-inflammatory activity), acoag (anticoagulant, such as inhibition of platelet aggregation), iger (allelophatic activity), photo (photo-protecting activity), cic (cicatrizing activity) and avir (antiviral activity) (for details see the Electronic Annex).complementary to a previous report of the geranylation of the phydroxybenzoic acid to its ether derivative with a recombinant geranyltransferase from bacterial origin (Haagena et al., 2007). Nevertheless, from the analysis of the spectral data of the product   Fig. 4. Typical chromatogram obtained for the biotransformation of the 3,4-dihydroxybenzoic acid, using GPP and the crude enzymatic extract from the leaves of P. crassinervium, which shows the product identified as compound 3 at t R : 8.6 min, and the proposed fragmentation pattern of the product eluted at t R : 13.1 min, based on the analysis of its MS and tandem MS-MS. Divalent cation: MgCl 2 . Final concentrations: 10 mM. Reaction conditions: 60 min, 35 °C. Chromatographic conditions: ACN-HOAc 0.1% (70:30), 1 ml/min, inj. vol. 50 ll, 25 min, detection: UV k = 280 nm. ESI negative mode À30 V. obtained and characterized by Haagena et al. (2007), we propose that it is the ester derivative instead of the ether, as reported. The expected chemical shift value for the CH 2 -1 0 at d observed in the 1 H NMR, should be similar for the two derivatives 6 and 7 and, therefore this data should not be enough to distinguish which derivative was formed. Thus, further NMR experiments including analysis of the 13 C NMR values and the gHMBC correlations were carried out.
MS-MS MSThe observed differences in the substrate specificity, suggest the presence of, at least, two geranyltransferases in P. crassinervium. One of them was soluble and showed affinity to the 3,4-dihydroxybenzoic acid, while the second was concentrated in the microsomal fraction, recognizing the p-hydroxybenzoic acid as substrate and was inducible by glucose. The SDS PAGE and 2-DE analysis indicated the concentration of spots between pI 6-7 and 56-58 kDa in the microsomal fraction, which is in agreement with previous reports for geranyltransferases from plants (Fig. 6).The two enzymatically formed products were characterized as O-geranylated derivatives and were previously reported as synthetic compounds (Kubo et al., 2003). The production of esters instead of ethers or C-prenylated derivatives, as naturally occurs in plants, suggests that different conditions and environments could affect the prenylation outcome in crude and partly purified enzymatic extracts. Besides, a C-geranylated derivative of the 3,4-dihydroxybenzoic acid bearing a carbonyl group at C-5 0 could be proposed by the analysis of its MS-MS fragmentation data. Our observations are in agreement with previous reports based on bacterial recombinant aromatic prenyltransferases (Haagena et al., 2007).In spite of the large number of data on phytochemistry and bioactivity on Piper species, no studies have been addressed to determine their antiviral potential and the only exception involved the monotypic Pothomorphe umbellata (Fig. 3). The inhibition of viral proteases has indeed been demonstrated to be a good target to search new drugs for the treatment of several illnesses including AIDS. In this context, the investigation on some common proteases such as subtilisin and pepsin is considered as a useful screening for the discovery of potential inhibitors of retroviral proteases (Hirata et al., 2005). Compounds 3 and 6 were tested as inhibitors of subtilisin and pepsin using the fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET) methodology. Both compounds showed weak activity, being the ester 6 slightly more active than 3 showing 15% of inhibition at 1 lg/ml on pepsin and 14% on subtilisin (Table 3). Warfarin and dicoumarol were tested as positive controls. The HIV-like protease inhibitory potential reported for 3 and 6 is the first approach to the determination of antiviral activity of this kind of compounds, and complements the range of biological activities previously reported, such as antifungal and antibacterial (Kubo et al., 2003;Nihei et al., 2004).
ConclusionsPrenylation of aromatic compounds represents an important feature when the formation of bioactive compounds in plants is concerned. There are several examples in which different simple prenyl, geranyl, farnesyl, geranylgeranyl or polyterpenic unities are added to aromatic substrates rendering them with important biological properties. The literature survey indicated that among Piperaceae family, P. crassinervium species appeared as an important source of geranyltransferase activity looking at biotransformations reactions. Between the two substrates evaluated, the phydroxybenzoic acid was O-geranylated, whilst the 3,4-dihydroxybenzoic acid was both C-and O-geranylated. The O-geranylated products presented a weak protease inhibitory activity. The electrophoretic analysis performed on the microsomal fraction showed a typical prenyltransferase electrophoretic profile (Mr 56-58 kDa, pI 6-7).This work contributes to the comprehensive study of biotransformation reactions with geranyl moieties using plant enzymatic extracts as an alternative strategy to the biocatalysis with purified enzymes. Table 3 Inhibitory activity (%) for compounds 3 and 6 tested at 1 lg/ml on pepsin and subtilisin. Warfarin and dicoumarol were included as positive controls (1 lg/ml).
RFCompound (1 lg/ml) Fig. 1 .1Fig. 1. Distribution of Piperaceae members considering the report of some biological activity for their isolated compounds. The abundance of Piper crassinervium is highlighted, and the structure of the geranylated bioactive compounds, 4hydroxy-3-E-(3 0 ,7 0 -dimethyl-1 0 -oxo-2 0 ,6 0 -octadienyl)-benzoic acid (1) and 1,4-dihydroxy-2-E-(3 0 ,7 0 -dimethyl-1 0 -oxo-2 0 ,6 0 -octadienyl)-benzene (2), is presented. (for details see the Electronic Annex).
Fig. 2 .2Fig. 2. (A) Distribution by type of bioactive compounds reported by genera in Piperaceae family. ALK (substances bearing nitrogen at the molecule),LG (lignans, neolignans and related compounds), PCT (polyketides), TP (terpenoids), BPPR (prenylated benzopyrans), HQPR (prenylated hydroquinones), BPR (prenylated benzoic acid derivatives), FLV (flavonoids, chalcones and related compounds), B (benzene derivatives), BP (benzopyrans), AG (fatty acids), FP (phenylpropanoids), E (epoxides), ET (steroids), CHX (cyclohexanic derivatives), KLN (kavalactones, pyrones, and related compounds) and NPT (naphthalene derivatives). (B) Distribution observed by biological activity groups for each genus reported: snc (related to central nervious system, such as sedative and relaxant), tryp (antiprotozoal activity against Trypanosoma, Plasmodium, Leishmania), cyt (cytotoxicity and related), atb (antimicrobial, such as antibacterial and antifungal), can (anticancer activity, related to cytotoxic but more specifically targeted), insec (insecticidal or repellent activity, such as anti-mosquito or ant), aox (antioxidant activity, such as DPPH), enz (inhibiroty activity against several enzymes), aai (antiinflammatory activity), acoag (anticoagulant, such as inhibition of platelet aggregation), iger (allelophatic activity), photo (photo-protecting activity), cic (cicatrizing activity) and avir (antiviral activity) (for details see the Electronic Annex).
Fig. 5 .5Fig. 5. Chromatographic analysis for the enzymatic reaction of the crude enzymatic extract, from the leaves of P. crassinervium before (A) and after (B) the treatment with 10% glucose, with p-hydroxybenzoic acid and GPP. (C) Synthetic standard of the p-hydroxybenzoic acid geranyl ester. (D) Negative control. Divalent cation: MgCl 2 . Final concentrations: 10 mM. Reaction conditions: 60 min, 35 °C. Chromatographic conditions: ACN-HOAc 0.1% (70:30), 1 ml/min, inj. vol. 50 ll, 25 min, detection: UV k = 254 nm.
Fig. 6 .6Fig.6. SDS PAGE and 2-DE of the crude extract (CE) and the microsomal fraction (lFr) from the leaves of P. crassinervium. 2-DE conditions: for CE was used a 13 cm IPG strip pI 3-10 linear, for lFr was used a 13 cm IPG strip pI 4-7. SDS PAGE and the second dimension of 2-DE were executed with 12% of polyacrylamide gel, monitored with LMW standards (14-97 kDa). Staining of gels was performed with AgNO 3 (Silver Staining Protocol, Amersham Biosciences). Digitalisation and image analysis were performed using LabImage 1D Ò and Image Master 5.0 Ò software.
Table 2 12
