Structure of Trypanosoma cruzi glycosomal glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase complexed with chalepin, a natural product inhibitor, at 1.95 A î resolution
The structure of the glycosomal glyceraldehyde-3phosphate dehydrogenase (gGAPDH) from Trypanosoma cruzi complexed with chalepin, a natural product from Pilocarpus spicatus, has been determined by X-ray crystallography to 1.95 A î resolution. The structure is in the apo form without cofactors in the subunits of the tetrameric gGAPDH in the asymmetric unit. Unequivocal density corresponding to the inhibitor was clearly identified in one monomer. The final refined model of the complex shows extensive conformational changes when compared with the native structure. The mode of binding of chalepin to gGAPDH and its implications for inhibitor design are discussed.

IntroductionSome protozoan parasites of the family Trypanosomatidae cause a wide variety of severe diseases such as the American trypanosomiasis known as Chagas' disease. Some 100 million persons ^a quarter of all the inhabitants of Latin America âre at risk of contracting the disease and an estimated 16^18 million people are infected [1]. Chagas' disease is caused by infection with the parasite Trypanosoma cruzi. It is transmitted by the blood-sucking Triatomine insects, through blood transfusions or congenitally from infected mothers. No e¡ective treatment is available for the disease [2].The modern approach of target-directed drug development involves the identi¢cation of suitable enzymes taking part in essential metabolic pathways of pathogens. Several peculiarities in the biology of trypanosomatids have been suggested to be exploitable for drug design purposes [3]. Trypanosomatids are highly dependent on glycolysis for ATP production [4,5] and the in silico modeling of the pathway has indicated the reaction catalyzed by glycosomal glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (gGAPDH) as one of the preferred steps for inhibition [6,7]. The enzyme catalyzes the oxidative phosphorylation of D-glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate into 1,3-diphosphoglycerate in the presence of NAD þ and inorganic phosphate. Structural studies of the enzymes from Trypanosoma brucei [8] and Leishmania mexicana [9] have shown di¡erences in the NAD þ cofactor binding pocket when compared with the human homologue, which lead to the design and synthesis of several inhibitors focusing on this site [10^13]. Aiming at the design of novel classes of anti-chagasic drugs, the structure of the T. cruzi gGAPDH was determined and described elsewhere [14]. Computational search procedures [15] and extensive screening of plant extracts through the enzymatic inhibitory assays have been performed in the search for promising lead compounds [15^17]. Several coumarins were found as the most promising class of substances from natural sources with signi¢cant gGAPDH inhibitory activity. Amongst them is chalepin (Fig. 1), a coumarin extracted from Pilocarpus spicatus, which has an IC 50 (inhibitor concentration required for 50% inhibition of enzymatic activity) of 64 WM [17].In order to elucidate the mechanism of inhibition and the speci¢c mode of binding of this inhibitor, and to elicit further improvement of this molecule through structure-based drug design, we present here the crystallographic structure of gGAPDH from T. cruzi complexed with chalepin.
Materials and methods
Preparation and puri¢cation of T. cruzi gGAPDHRecombinant T. cruzi gGAPDH was prepared and puri¢ed according to a previously reported procedure [14].
Extraction, isolation and identi¢cation of chalepinThe air-dried powdered stem of P. spicatus (Rutaceae) was exhaustively extracted with organic solvents (hexane, CH 2 Cl 2 and MeOH) through percolation processing at room temperature. Crude extracts were obtained after evaporation of the solvents under reduced pressure at 40 ‡C. The hexane extract (PSSH, 6.0 g) was fractionated through liquid^liquid partition with hexane^methanol^water (10:9:1) followed by ethyl acetate^methanol^water (1:1:1) and buta-nol^methanol^water (1:1:2). The ethyl acetate fraction (PSSH/A, 1.3 g) was chromatographed on a silica gel column using a step gradient of hexane and ethyl acetate. Successive £ash chromatography of the fraction eluted with 20^30% hexane/ethyl acetate allowed the isolation of the 6-(1,1-dimethylallyl)-2-(1-hydroxy-1-methylethyl)-2,3-dihydro-7H-furo[3,2-g]chromen-7-one, a coumarin known as chalepin (45 mg). The structure of chalepin was deduced on the basis of its spectral 0014-5793 / 02 / $22.00 ß 2002 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved. PII: S 0 0 1 4 -5 7 9 3 ( 0 2 ) 0 2 7 0 0 -X *Corresponding author. Fax: (55)-16-2739881. E-mail address: oliva@if.sc.usp.br (G. Oliva).
FEBS 26069FEBS Letters 520 (2002) 13^17 data ( 1 H and 13 C nuclear magnetic resonance and mass spectrometry), which were con¢rmed by comparative analysis with the literature values [18].
Enzymatic inhibition studiesThe enzymatic activities of T. cruzi gGAPDH and its human homologue and the inhibitory activity of chalepin against these enzymes have been determined according to a previously reported procedure [17], using the forward reaction.The IC 50 was determined empirically. A wide range of concentrations (10^100 Wg/ml) of inhibitor were tested at substrate and cofactor saturating conditions. The percentage of remaining activity was calculated by comparison with an inhibitor-free control experiment.The chalepin showed no inhibition of human GAPDH activity while it showed an IC 50 of 64 WM against T. cruzi gGAPDH, as mentioned above.
Co-crystallization assaysCo-crystallization assays were carried out using a protein solution at 8 mg/ml in 0.1 M TEA pH 7.6, 1 mM NAD þ , 1 mM DTT, 1 mM PMSF, 1 mM EDTA, 1 WM leupeptin and 1 WM pepstatin pre-incubated with 5 mM of inhibitor and 10% (v/v) of acetonitrile. Crystals of the complex gGAPDH^chalepin were grown at 22 ‡C by vapor di¡usion, against a reservoir solution of 0.1 M sodium cacodylate pH 6.9^7.1, with 0.1 M calcium acetate, 16^18% of polyethylene glycol 8000, in a microgravity environment during £ight STS-91 of the NASA US Space Shuttle program. Mechanical damage upon landing and transport of crystals resulted in few crystals being available for data collection.
Data collection and processingCrystals of the gGAPDH^chalepin complex were £ash-cooled to 100 K in an Oxford Cryostream Cooler. The cryoprotectant solution used consists of 20% polyethylene glycol 400 added to the above described reservoir solution. The X-ray source was a Rigaku RU-200 rotating anode generator operating at 50 kV/100 mA. Di¡raction intensities were collected with an R-AXIS II image plate, using the rotation method [19]. Data processing was carried out with programs DENZO and SCALEPACK [20]. Final electron density maps for each collected data set revealed that only in one crystal the inhibitor could be unambiguously modelled. Data collection and processing statistics for this data set are summarized in Table 1. The experiment had to be interrupted after 120 frames due to loss of cryogenic protection. All available and well measured data were included in the re¢nement, on the basis that the program used does take care adequately of low intensity data, through proper weighting of weak observations. The criterion used to decide on the cut-o¡ of the data was to limit the resolution when I/c(I) was above 1.0 and the R merge was below 50%.Crystals belong to the space group P2 1 with unit cell parameters a = 82.08 A î , b = 84.97 A î , c = 105.24 A î and L = 96.32 ‡. The analysis of crystal contents indicates one tetramer per asymmetric unit and a V m value of 2.34 A î 3 /Da.
Structure determination and re¢nementThe structure of the chalepin complex was determined by molecular replacement, using the program AMoRe [21]. The native gGAPDH structure without ligands or water molecules was used as the search model. Using di¡raction data in the resolution range 15.0^4.0 A î , the top solution showed correlation coe⁄cient of 61.3% and R factor of 35.7%. The rotated and translated model was re¢ned using REFMAC [22], the electron density maps and omit maps were calculated using FFT [23] and OMIT [24], respectively, all from the CCP4 suite of programs [25]. Manual rebuilding of the macromolecular model and graphics visualization were performed using the O software [26]. The crystallographic R factor and R free;3% values, as well as the stereochemistry quality of the model (program PROCHECK [27]), were constantly monitored during the course of the re¢nement.The ¢rst cycle was a rigid body re¢nement, with only the quaternary structure of the model tetramer being allowed to change while the four individual subunits were held as rigid bodies. This re¢nement produced a R factor of 0.398 and R free of 0.405. 2F obs 3F calc and F obs 3F calc electron density maps calculated from this model showed no density in the cofactor binding sites which could be interpretable as NAD þ . This fact clearly indicated the interference of the inhibitor over the enzyme. Thus, the following cycles of restrained crystallographic re¢nement were carried out without non-crystallographic symmetry to search for any bound inhibitor to the tetramer. A di¡erence (F obs 3F calc ) electron density map calculated after 10 cycles of automated restrained re¢nement showed density in the active site of the C subunit resembling the inhibitor. At this point, the R factor was 0.252 and R free was 0.322. After several iterative cycles of restrained re¢nement of the atomic coordinates followed by visual manipulation, water molecules were automatically built into the model using the program ARP [28]. After inclusion of 630 water molecules the R factor dropped to 0.209 and R free to 0.282. At this stage a molecule of chalepin was manually built into the electron density observed at the C subunit active site. The ¢nal cycles of re¢nement included the addition of another 307 waters, as well as the re¢nement of partial occupancies for the inhibitor and the two alternative conformations for the ^SH group of active site Cys 166 of subunit C. The results are summarized in Table 2.
Protein data bank accession numberThe atomic coordinates of the T. cruzi gGAPDH^chalepin co-crystal structure and the structure factor amplitudes have been deposited with the Protein Data Bank under ID code 1K3T.
Results and discussion
Quality of the structureThe ¢nal 2F obs 3F calc electron density maps calculated for the gGAPDH^chalepin complex show good quality (Fig. 2). The stereochemistry of the structure is, in general, quite satisfactory, with more than 99% of the residues showing torsion angles in the favorable regions of the Ramachandran diagram [29]. Only Ala 73 from the C subunit and Val 255 from all subunits are in unfavorable regions. Ala 73 is located in a £exible loop at the N-terminal, which shows poor electron density,   causing di⁄culties to appropriately model its torsion angles.Val 255 is located in a loop between two consecutive L-strands and its uncommon conformation is conserved in all other GAPDH structures available [8,9,14,30,31] and is important to maintain the correct positioning of the active residue Cys 166 with respect to the nicotinamide ring of the NAD þ cofactor during catalysis. The average temperature factor values for the main chain and all atoms of the 359 residues from each subunit are, respectively, 24.3 A î 2 and 25.2 A î 2 , to the A subunit, 29.9 A î 2 and 30.7 A î 2 , to the B subunit, 42.8 A î 2 and 43.3 A î 2 , to the C subunit and 25.0 A î 2 and 26.1 A î 2 , to the D subunit. The average temperature factor value for all atoms of chalepin is 70.8 A î 2 . The higher values of the average temperature factor observed for the C subunit re£ect the static disorder resulting from the partial occupancy of the inhibitor (85%) at its active site. Analysis of the crystal packing shows that the NAD þ binding domain of subunit C has no lattice contacts, compatible with alternative domain rotations.
Structural di¡erences between gGAPDH complexed withchalepin (apo form, without NAD + ) and the native holo form The four individual subunits of the gGAPDH tetramer are related to each other by a 222 non-crystallographic symmetry. Each subunit is composed of two domains: the NAD þ binding domain, comprising residues 1^150 at the N-terminal and residues 331^359 at the C-terminal; and the catalytic domain, Fig. 2. Electron density omit maps (2F obs 3F calc ) of the GAPDH^chalepin complex, close to the active site, contoured at 1.3c level. Unambiguous density for the natural product inhibitor is seen. Figure produced with the program PyMOL Molecular Graphics System -DeLano Scien-ti¢c. Fig. 3. A: Superposition of the native T. cruzi gGAPDH structure (thin ribbon) and chalepin complex (thick ribbon) with the inhibitor displayed. The catalytic domain (left) was included in the superposition protocol. B: Close-up of the active site with ligands. The NAD þ is bound to the native structure whereas the chalepin is bound in the complex structure. The clash observed in the region of the nicotinamide moiety of NAD þ explains why the binding of the inhibitor implies in the displacement of the cofactor, therefore stabilizing the apo structure of the enzyme. Figure produced with the program Web Lab Viewer (Molecular Simulations Inc.). comprising residues 151^330. The tetramer of GAPDH is formed exclusively through contacts between all four catalytic domains, constituting a rigid core of the tetrameric particle that remains virtually unchanged in both native and complex structures. The displacement of the NAD þ cofactor by the binding of the inhibitor induces the holo to apo transition, represented predominantly by an approximate rigid-body rotation of 4 ‡ of the NAD binding domain of each subunit relative to the structurally conserved catalytic domain (Fig. 3). Other internal modi¢cations of the NAD þ binding domain are also present. This feature has previously been observed in the apo and holo forms of GAPDH and liver alcohol dehydrogenase enzymes from other sources [32^34]. The authors suggested that the overall e¡ect of this conformational change is to expose the cofactor and active site to solvent in the apo form and provide additional shield of the cofactor and active site from solvent in the holo form. Indeed, the tetrameric holoenzyme shows a solvent-accessible surface area of 46 051 A î 2 while the apo-enzyme has a surface area of 49 152 A î 2 . The solvent-accessible surface buried upon ligand binding at subunit C is 205 A î 2 .
gGAPDH^chalepin interaction architectureOf the possible 525 A î 2 of solvent-accessible surface area in the free inhibitor, 209 A î 2 are exposed to solvent in the complex and 316 A î 2 are buried upon binding. The analysis of the complex shows three important interacting groups from chalepin (Fig. 4). The carbonyl oxygen from lactonic group interacts with residue Thr 167 by hydrogen bonds mediated by a water molecule W 739 . The 1,1-dimethylallyl group interacts by hydrophobic contacts with catalytic residue Cys 166 , which has to undergo a conformational change through a rotation of M 1 , in order to accommodate the positioning of the inhibitor at the active site. Indeed, the ¢nal electron density maps show the two alternative conformations of Cys 166 , one of them apparently connecting to the inhibitor. This is an artifact, since the side chain of this residue is at the native conformation only when the inhibitor is absent. Therefore, the evident two conformations of the Cys 166 side chain guarantee that the inhibitor has to have partial occupancy. Finally, the oxygen atom from the benzo-dihydrofuran group interacts with residue Arg 249 through a hydrogen bond mediated by water molecule W 813 . The 1-hydroxy-1-methylethyl group interacts weakly with the residue Asp 210 by hydrogen bond mediated by a water molecule W 812 .
Implications for drug design approachBased on this analysis, modi¢cations in the chalepin inhibitor can be suggested by molecular modeling studies. At the 1,1-dimethylallyl binding site it is evident (Fig. 5) that there are neighboring regions with charged residues, which remain unoccupied after binding of the inhibitor. It is therefore possible to design the replacement of the 1,1-dimethylallyl group by substituents containing heteroatoms like nitrogen, oxygen or halogens. These modi¢cations could enable the formation of new dipole^dipole interactions resulting in energetic gain notably greater than the hydrophobic interactions observed in the crystal structure. Besides, Souza et al. [14] suggest that the substitution of Asp 210 (T. cruzi) by Leu 194 (human) brings a new target for selective inhibition. The chalepin 1-hydroxy-1methylethyl group does not interact e⁄ciently with the protein. The introduction of a linker arm of one or two carbon atoms may cause a closer contact between the chalepin hydroxyl and the Asp 210 delta2 oxygen atom, producing more e¡ective polar interactions and increasing speci¢city for the parasitic enzyme. New proposed coumarin derivatives are being synthesized and tested against T. cruzi gGAPDH to evaluate these possibilities.Fig. 1 .1Fig. 1. Chalepin.
Fig. 4 .Fig. 5 .45Fig. 4. Stereoview of the overall mode of binding of chalepin to gGAPDH active site. Figure produced with the program Web Lab Viewer [Molecular Simulations Inc.].


Table 11Statistics of X-ray data collection and processingRotation angle1.0 ‡Total number of frames120Total collected re£ections195 798Number of unique re£ections Resolution limit81 630 1.95 A îCompleteness77.9% [38.1%]R merge10.7% [48.3%]I/c(I)6.78 [1.1]Redundancy2.4 [1.6]The values in brackets correspond to the last resolution shell (2.021.95 A î )
Table 22Final re¢nement statisticsResolution range15^1.95 A îAmino acid residues per monomer359Water molecules937Inhibitor molecule in the a.u.1R factor0.201R free;3% RMS bond deviations0.280 0.015 A îRMS angle deviations3.1 ‡
