An HPLC-PAD Method to Analyse Flavonoid Glycosides and Styrylpyrones from Cryptocarya Species (Lauraceae)
An HPLC-PAD method has been developed in order to evaluate simultaneously the main secondary metabolites, flavonoid glycosides and styrylpyrones, of leaves of Cryptocarya moschata. The sample preparation, consisting of extraction, liquid-liquid extraction and centrifugation, requires minimum sample manipulation but produces high yields with reproducibility, selectivity and simplicity. HPLC on a C 18 column presents each class of metabolites grouped and with good resolution of the main compounds. The experimental conditions can be used to study inter-and intra-specific variability of secondary metabolites in Cryptocarya spp.

INTRODUCTIONCryptocarya moschata Nees is an arboreal species of some 25-30 m height that is widely spread in the Atlantic forests of Brazil. It is recognised as an important food source for primates such as Brachyteles arachnoids E. Geoffroy, 1806 (mono-carvoeiro or muriqui). A study of the genetic structure of four natural populations of this species, using isoenzyme markers, showed a high level of genetic diversity when compared with other tropical angiosperm trees. The intra-populational genetic variability was found to be more prominent than that exhibited between populations, and the estimated gene flow corroborated the pronounced divergence found among populations (Moraes et al., 1999).Phytochemical studies of the bark of C. moschata have shown that styrylpyrones are the typical secondary metabolites present in this species (Cavalheiro and Yoshida, 2000). Flavonoid glycosides, as well as styrylpyrones, have been detected in leaves, and the qualitative and quantitative intra-specific variability of these secondary metabolites has also been determined (Nehme at al., 2002).In this paper, a protocol of extraction, clean-up and HPLC analysis is described that may be employed to establish simultaneously the flavonoid and styrylpyrone profiles of the leaves of C. moschata with the aim of identifying chemotypes related to these metabolites.    Styrylpyrone standards. Standards of the styrylpyrones cryptomoscatones E3 (S1), D1 (S2), D2 (S3), F1 (S4) and E1 (S6), and cryptofolione (S7) (Fig. 1) were obtained previously from bark of C. moschata (Cavalheiro and Yoshida, 2000). Deacetylcryptocaryalactone (S5) and goniothalamin (S8) were obtained by flash chromatography and preparative HPLC of hydromethanolic extracts of C. moschata and C. aschersoniana, respectively, and identified by UV and NMR data. 
EXPERIMENTALF1 F2 F3 F4 F5 F6 C 13 C b 1 H b 1 3 C b 1 H b 1 3 C b 1 H b 1 3 C b 1 H b 1 3 C b 1 H b 1 3 C b 1 HInstrumentation
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Sample extraction and clean-upThe protocol for sample extraction and clean-up was evaluated for efficiency of extraction and reproducibility of retention time and peak area. The same sample was submitted four times to the extraction procedure as described above and the experiment was carried out in triplicate. The efficiency of extraction with respect to each chromatographic peak was calculated by considering as 100% the total of all four of the peak areas obtained for that compound following analysis of the four extractions (Table 1 and Fig. 2). In the first extraction, the yield corresponding to the 12 main peaks was 86.0 ± 3.3%. No flavonoid glycosides or styrylpyrones were detected in the petroleum ether phase showing the high selectivity of the liquid-liquid extraction step that was used to eliminate lipophilic components.
Development of the chromatographic protocolIn a previous paper (Nehme et al., 2002) the intraspecific variability of secondary metabolites in leaves of C. moschata was determined using a Shimpack (Southall, UK) C 18 column (15 × 0.46 cm i.d.) eluted with phos-phoric acid-triethylamine (pH 2.0; solvent A) and acetonitrile (solvent B) with a linear gradient from 85:15 (A:B) to 60:40 in 45 min followed by isocratic elution with 60:40 (A:B) for 10 min, at a flow rate of 0.7 mL/min. Analysis of the UV spectra obtained from each chromatographic peak by PAD, together with retention time (t R ) values of standards, showed the presence of flavonoid glycosides (t R between 12 and 21 min) and styrylpyrones (t R between 26 and 38 min.). The three main peaks were identified as quercitrin (t R = 20.70 min), cryptomoscatone D2 (t R = 28.90 min) and cryptofolione (t R = 34.73 min). However, under these chromatographic conditions several peaks remained unresolved (Nehme et al., 2002).In order to improve the resolution, a longer (25 cm) C 18 column was employed with the elution conditions as described above except for the flow rate, which was 1.0 mL/min. The chromatogram obtained in these conditions showed 20 well-resolved peaks, with the flavonoids grouped from 12 to 20 min, and the styrylpyrones grouped from 24 to 36 min. In addition, at least two unresolved peaks between 22 and 25 min were tentatively attributed to aporphine alkaloids based on UV spectra (Fig. 3). These chromatographic conditions permitted the analysis of three classes of secondary metabolites in the polar extracts of leaves from C. moschata.The identities of the main peaks was established by comparison of t R values and UV spectra with standards together with co-injection studies. In order to facilitate the identification of peaks, a relative retention time with respect to quercitrin (as internal reference) was determined for each peak (Table 2).The methodology was applied to analyse the secondary metabolites in leaves of four species of Cryptocarya collected in the Atlantic rain forest in the state of São Paulo (Brazil). A comparison of the chromatographic profiles (Fig. 3) revealed that the pattern of flavonoids with peaks between 16 and 22 min was very similar among the species with only quantitative differences. C. saligna and C. aschersoniana showed an intense peak for quercetin-3-O-β-d-galactopyranoside (F1) whilst C. saligna exhibited another intense peak (absent from the other species) at 24.7 min, attributed to an unidentified flavonoid with absorptions at 220, 293 and 335 nm. In the chromatograms from extracts of C. mandioccana and C. moschata, the most intense flavonoid peak was quercetin-3-O-α-D-rhamnopyranoside (F6). In addition, another unidentified flavonoid, labelled as (F) with a t R of 24.8 min, in the chromatograms of C. mandioccana and C. moschata, showed UV spectra with absorptions at 203, 260 and 340 nm, which suggested the presence of the aglycone quercetin in this flavonoid. An additional unidentified peak with a t R of 42.7 min in the chromatogram of C. aschersoniana showed absorptions at 235, 267 and 362 nm, which were indicative of a dihydrochalcone.Furthermore, each species was shown to possess a distinguishable profile of styrylpyrones. Thus, C. moschata showed higher diversity in this class of compounds; C. aschersoniana showed only one intense peak with a UV spectra similar to styrylpyrone, which was assigned as goniothalamin (S8); C. mandioccana showed only small peaks from 24 to 36 min with UV spectra similar to the styrylpyrones found in C. moschata, and C. saligna exhibited no styrylpyrone peaks as based on UV spectra. All peaks labelled with (S) in the chromatogram in Fig. 3 had UV spectra very similar those from identified styrylpyrones.   In conclusion, the proposed extraction and analytical methodology will be useful in studying the composition of flavonoids and styrylpyrones in Cryptocarya species, assisting in taxonomic and physiological studies, including inter-and intra-specific variability of secondary metabolites.Materials.Plant material of Cryptocarya moschata was collected in the Carlos Botelho State Park (São Miguel
Figure 1 .1Figure 1. Flavonoids glycosides (F1-F6) and styrylpyrones (S1-S8) identified in leaves from Cryptocarya moschata.
Figure 2 .2Figure 2. Yields of the 13 main compounds obtained in four sequential extractions of the same sample of leaves of Cryptocarya moschata (mean values of triplicate experiments).
Figure 3 .3Figure 3. Chromatographic profiles of four species of Cryptocarya growing in the Atlantic rain forest in the state of São Paulo, Brazil. Peaks labelled F, A and S were associated with, respectively, flavonoids, alkaloids and styrylpyrones; the peak labelled NI was not identified. The inserts show typical UV spectra (PAD) of compound classes F, A and S.
Table 1 . NMR data for the flavonoid glycosides F1-F6 isolated from leaves of Cryptocarya moschata1Compound a
Table 2 . Reproducibility of retention time, relative retention time, peak area and yield of flavonoid glycosides and styrylpyrones (data from first extraction only) from leaves of Cryptocarya moschata obtained by liquid-liquid extraction2Relativeretention timeRetention(in relation toArea ± σYield ± σ
