JURUENOLIDE: A y-LACTONE FROM IRYANTHERA JI/Rb'ENSIS"
The chemical investigation of the trunk wood of a specimen of Iryanthem juruemis Warb. (Myristicaceae), revealed the presence of sitosterol, sitostenone, (+)-2'-hydroxy-7-methoxy-4'S'-methylenedioxyflavan[l] and a lactone, C,,H,,O,, designated juruenolide.The PMR spectra of the compound and of its acetate allowed expansion of the formula to la. This contains a piperonylethyl unit (z 3,3-3.5. 3ArH; 4.16, 0zCH2 ; 7.53, r, J 7.5 Hz. ArCI&CH2), a methylene chain (z X.  The biogenetic origin of juruenolide (la) could involve condensation of a C, ,-fatty acid precursor (2) with an activated cinnamic acid (3) via an intermediate such as 4. The additional oxygenation of 2 has been postulated previously to explain the biosynthesis of the avocatins and the rubrenolides [I], constituents of the Lauraceae, a family which is morphologically closely related with the Myristicaceae.3-8.8. 15 CH2). whose signal covers an additional one H signal. and a hydroxy-y-lactone unit (la \I,,,~~ 1745 cm _ ' ; lb vmaX 1770, 1730 cm-1 ). The allocation of the hydroxyl to C-2 and of the methylene chain to C-4 of this lactone was based on the analysis of the signals associated with its 2 oxymethine and 2 methylene protons. The latter can only be situated on C-3. Double irradiation experiments revealed one of them (T 8.7) to be coupled to H-4 (T 552) and the other one (z 7.44) to H-2 (t 5.881. Further correlation of the T 5.88 doublet with the carbinolic proton was based on the paramagnctic shift (A -0.86 ppm) of this signal upon acctylation.
5 value (8.7) of one of the methylene proton signals indicated that the corresponding H-3 is situated well over the plane of the carbonyl. Coupling and absence of coupling was seen as evidence, respectively, for its ci.\-relation to H-4 and tru/zs-relation to H-2. An identical conclusion about the relative stereochemistry ofjurucnolide was reached upon observing the coupling of the relatively deprotected (r 7,441, and hence ~IILI,S;equatorial. H-3 to H-2 and the absence of coupling to H-4. According to the modified Hudson rule [2], formula la represents also the absolute configuration of the &tone. since this is more dextrorotatory. I_x]$' + 12-S (MeOH), than its potassium salt [Y];;' + IO.0 (MeOH).
* Part IV in the series "The Chemistry of Brazilian Myristicactae". For Part III see Ref. 1. Sponsored by Institute National de Pesquisas da Amazbnia, Conselho National de Pcsquisas. Manaus, and by Ministkrio do Planeiamento (Financiadora de Estudos e Projktos S.A.) and Associa&o Brasileira da Indlistria Farmadutica through Academia Brasileira de C'icncias. t Graduate-fellow of Funda@o de Amparo a Prsquisa do Estado de Slo Paula.
