
The trunk wood of Emmotum &ens (Benth.) Miers (Icacinaceae) contains the aromatic sesquiterpenes 2-hydroxy-3-(2'-hydroxyisopropy1)-8-methoxymethy1-5-methy1-l-oxo-l,2,3,4-tetrahydronaphthalene (emmotin-A), 2-hydroxy-5-hydroxymethy1-3-(2'-hydroxyisopropy1)-8-m~thoxyme~hyi-l-oxo-l,2,3,4-tetrahydronaphthalene (emmotin-B), 1,2-dihydroxy-8-formyl-3-isopropyl-5-methylnaphthalene (emmotin-C) and 8-carboxy-1,2-dihydroxy-3-(2'-hydroxyisopropyl)-5-methylnaphthalene y-lactone (emmotin-D). A SPECIMEN of Emmotum nitens (Benth.) Miers, an arboreous Icacinaceae species growing in the vicinity of Diamantina in the Brazilian state of Minas Gerais, was collected and identified by the botanist A. Pereira Duarte. A chemical investigation of the trunk wood has now revealed the presence of sitosterol and four crystalline compounds, designated emmotin-A, -B, -C, and -D.Elemental analysis and MS MW determination of emmotin-A indicated its formula to be C,,Hz20,.Its UV and IR spectra revealed the presence of an aryl ketone moiety and its PMR spectrum exhibited signals characteristic of two ortho hydrogens, aromatic methyl and methoxymethyl groups, a 2-hydroxyisopropyl function and a 3-carbon unit defined in part structure 1. The relative substituent positions in the latter were determined from the shift and coupling behavior of its 4 hydrogens. The oxymethine hydrogen (4.43 ppm) was represented by a doublet of 12.5 Hz, the other methine hydrogen (2.21 ppm) by a double 1 : 2 : 1 triplet of 12.5, 12.5 and 4.5 Hz and the methylene hydrogens (2.53, 3.02 ppm) by two quartets of 16.5 and 12.5 Hz and of 16.5 and 4.5 Hz, respectively. The chemical shifts of the hydrogens of the 3-carbon system indicated the terminal carbons to be attached to the carbonyl group and aromatic ring and hence the central carbon to the hydroxyisopropyl group. The presence of an a-ketol function in emmotin-A, indicated by the deacetoxylation of the diacetate 2b and formation of * Part I in the projected series "The Chemistry of Brazilian Icacinaceae", taken from part of the M. S. Thesis submitted by M. de L. M. F. to the Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, and Part XXI in the series "13C NMR Spectroscopy of Naturally Occurring Substances". PHYTO 13/7--L 1199 ' Roct \t tt II. K. S. and (;\I I ,\<;ttrzi<. 1'. I-. (lwi) .J. 1~11. ( /i<,,rt soc 77. 136'.

3 on reduction with zinc,' showed that the attachment of the j-carbon unit to the remainder of the ring system could only be in the form depicted in 2a.( The PMR spectrum of emmotin-A diacetate confirmed the structural environment of the nuclear hydroxy group by the u 1 ppm paramagnetic shift experienced by the oxymethine hydrogen on acetylation.The side chain alcohol is tertiary and the natural product underwent dehydration on treatment with phosphorous oxychloride in pyridine. Although the resultant mixture could not be separated. its PMR spectrum revealed it to consist of olefins 4 and 5 by the methyl singlets (1.64. I.73 ppm) of the isopropylidene unit of the former and the methyl singlet (1.57 ppm) and olefinic methylene multiplet (4.9-5.2 ppm) of the isopropenyl group of the latter. The methoxymethyl group was shown to be located orrho to the carbonyl function and its oxymethylenc hydrogens deshielded by the latter. since sodium borohydride reduction of emmotin-A yielded a trio1 whose PMR spectrum revealed the oxymethylenc hydrogen signal 0.9 ppm upfield of its earlier position. The combined PMR data for emmotin-A and its derivatives showed the natural product to possess structure 2a or 6a. While 2a was preferred on biogenetic grounds. its final proof depended on its '.'C NM R analysis (ritlc ir~/i.tr).  ' HOKTMAN\, A. and I)F Roos, J. R. (1969) J. 01-q. c'/f~m. 34. 7.36.or 6c for emmotin-B. The natural abundance '-'C NMR spectra of emmotin-A and emmotin-B yielded further insight into the structures of the two sesquiterpenes. Inspection of the protondecoupled and the single-frequency, off-resonance decoupled spectra of the former in CDCl, revealed one carbonyl, one quaternary sp3 carbon and four quaternary aromatic carbon signals, two non-aromatic an'd two aromatic methine resonances, two methylene and four methyl signals, while a similar inspection of the spectra of emmotin-B in CDCI, showed the replacement of a methyl resonance by a methylene signal. The assignment of the chemical shifts of all non-aromatic carbons, indicated on formulas 7 and 8 for emmotin-A and emmotin-B, respectively, was based on chemical shift theory,2 while that for the aromatic carbon shifts was founded on the following arguments. The difference of the methine carbon shifts is mainly due to the difference of the disposition of the carbons toward the carbonyl group, the p-carbon being deshielded strongly.2 The latter as well as the quaternary centers under the aromatic methyl group and its ortho neighbour are the only aromatic carbons differing in chemical shift in the two compounds, hence revealing the presence of the extra oxygen in their vicinity in emmotin-B. The remaining two quaternary carbon shifts are assigned on the basis of expected similarity of the 6 values of the two carbons ortho to the acylated carbon site. only the shifts of the aromatic carbons in the neighbourhood of the aromatic methyl group of emmotin-A are changed in emmotin-B proves that the methyl function of the former and the hydroxymethyl group of the latter occupy the same position in the aromatic ring of the two substances.Furthermore, the shielding of the benzylic methylene group in the hydroaromatic ring on introduction of an oxygen onto the aromatic methyl group shows the ortho relationship between the two groups, excludes structures 6 for the emmotins and limits emmotin-A to structure 2a. Finally, the nearly identical shifts of the methoxymethyl carbons and their aromatic neighbours in the two emmotins excludes the possibility of the methoxymethyl and hydroxymethyl units being interchanged in emmotin-B and limits the latter to structure 2c. The emmotins A and B coexist in the plant with structurally related, minor, naphthalenes. The PMR spectrum of one of the latter, emmotinthe minor product. The aldehyde function (9.66 ppm singlet) was hydrogen-bonded to a hydroxyl group (12.3 ppm, s) and deshielded an ortho hydrogen (7.79 ppm) which was coupled strongly (8 Hz) to another hydrogen (7.24 ppm) whose PMR signal broadness revealed weak, long-range coupling with the neighbouring methyl group (hs. 2.77 ppm). These facts are in agreement with structure 9 for emmotin-C. z STO-THI;HS. J. B. (1972) l.'C NMR Spc~c'tro.my~. Academic Press. New York: LEVY. G. C. and NEISON. G. L.
(1972) "C Nucletrr Muynrric Rrsor~~~rm~for Oryurric Clrrrrrists, Wiley Interscience. New York. ,H,,O,), showed it also to be a naphthalene, while its IR spectrum .and that of its acetate (lob) and of its aryl methyl cthcr (l(k). prepared llicl diazomethane. indicated it to possess a Y-lactone unit. The PMR spectra of emmotin-75 ppm methyl sin&t. SG5.2 ppm methylenc multiplet) of the latter proved the presence of a 2-hydroxyisopropyl group in cmmotin-D. These results and biogenetic considerations indicated structure IOa for emmotin-D. . recently isolated from diseased potato tubers." and occidol (12)." Since the latter co-occurs in Thr/jtr oc~~ic/c~rtrli.s L. with occidentalol () of the C,,H, extract (773 g) on silica (I 3 kg) and clutlou with C,H, and C,,H, -CHCI,5 (1 : I) gave an 011 and a wiid. rcspecti\clh. nhlch *cr-I) eluate from EtOH Icd to emmotirl-1% (3.0 g). Chromatography of ;I po~-tlo~, (100 g) 01' the LtOH extract (310 g) on silica (I.0 kg) and rcchromatography of the hen/cnc eluatc (2 5 g) on silica (SO g) ga\c a solid whose crystallization from 2: 1 Et,0 pctrnl. produced emmotln-C (52 trig). Extraction of the ground softwood (9.0 kg) with C,,H,,. chromatography of a pal-tion (25 g) of the extract (210 g) on silica and crystallization of the C,,H, CHCI, (T: 3) eluatc from EtOH gave ?itorter-ol (12 mg). Cryst;tllizatton of the C,,H,, CIICI., (1 : 1) &ate from 3 : I Et?O-petrol.yiclded more cmmotin-A (7.35 mg). l\hilc Lrsstalli/ation of the CHC'I., McOH (20 : 1) chatc from EtOll af7trrdcti molt' cmmotln-I3 (300 mg).
