ESSENTLIL OILS F R O M BR,XZILIAN RUTACEAE. I . GENCS PILOC-4 RP US
Federiil do Ceerd, Fortn!eza-Ceard-Brasil .iBsTR.~CT.~Essential oil of Pi!ocnrpus ~n i c r o p h ~l l z l s Stapf, P. j a b o r m d i Holmes, P . a@nls paiici~fforiis Ptapf. P. s p 192 and P . s p 212 contains terpenes, sesquiterpenes and ketones. Pome of them are reported for the first time in the genus.

The leaves of jaborandi are commercially exploited in the Brazilian Sortheast for induftrial extraction of pilocarpine, an alkaloid ri-ith potent cholinergic activity (1).I n the leaves, there is also an essential oil present x-hose composition is registered in the literature in a confusing and incomplete way ( 2 , 3,4) n-hich might be attributed to improper selection of plant material or lack of suitable identihcation because analyses were made on commercial materials. Therefore, chemical reexamination of the essential oil from five distinct Pilocarpus species n-as conducted together with an analysis of the leaves used by local industry.
DISCUSSIOSThe plants were collected in the states of CearA, ;\laranh8o, and Pernanibuco. Commercial material was obtained from the industry in the state of Piaui. The lact material was mainly composed of Pilocarpus microphyllus Stapf. leaflets according to pliarniacognostic examination (3). P. jaboraiidi Holmes, P. micropltyllirs and P . afiiiis pauci-flortis Stapf. were identified among the specie; collected: t n o other distinct species of the genus are in the stage of botanical identification. Essential oil from each sample was obtained by steam distillation. I'ields and collection sites are described in table 1.  Table 2 presents the chemical composition of the essential oil from the five Pilocarpus species and includes. also, analyis of a commercial sample. a-Pinene is the only constituent present in all species studied, and the rare diterpene sandaracopimaradiene is characteristic of Pilocarpus jaborandi.The chemical constituents of the essential oil from commercial pilocarpus leaves confirms the pharmacognostic identification of P. mycrophyllus as the major species present in the mixture. The presence of all compounds except limonene and 2-undecanone is being reported for the first time in the genus. Comparison Kith reference spectrum (6).
0212; VI=Comerciai jaborandi leaves.No authentic samples available.
EXPERIMENTALThe plants were collected on the locations mentioned in T.ABLE 2 .'2Chemical composition of essential oils from Pilocarpus species from Brazilian northeast. I=Pilocarpus jaborandi; I I = P . minophyllus; I I I = P . afinis pauciflorus; IV=Pilocarpus sp. 0192; Y=Pilocarpus sp. Calculated b y glc. CAuthentic samples were supplied b y Dragoco S.A. (Sao Paulo, Brasil) or from the author's collection.
TABLE 1 .1Essential oils of pilocarpus species: yields and collections sites.Common name1 Botanical species I FromOil yield 7001Jaborandi do MaranhHoP . mycrophy!liis Stapflat. S. Ouit6ria-Ma. long.0.2502Jaborandi BrancoP . jaborandi Holmes3"33'S 42'35W Meruoca-Ce.0 . 5lat.long.3'30'S 40"30'\F'03JaborandiStapf. P . aflvis piliicifzoriislat. ;clo'S 3932551-long. Crat o-Ce.0.G04Jaborandi da FolhnPllGcO rp1l.s sp .-192T-ipsa-Ce.1 . 2pequenalat.long.05PimentinhaPilocarpus sp.--2129"28'S 36'25%' Bodoc6-Pe.0.G06Comercial jaborandiP. n i ~c r o p l ~y l l ~i s ~ Stapf.lat. i " 4 5 ' S 39'55'W long. Parnaiba-Pi.0 . 3~ so. 1 allajor species present in the mixture of leaflets.
table 1 .1Botanical identifications were made by Prof. B f r h i o G. Fernandes. Voucher specimens were deposited in the herbarium of the Departamento de Biologia-Universidade Federal do CearL under number 3023, 2969, 3229, 3251 and 3563.ISOLATIOS OF COSSTITrJEh.TS.-ESSential oil extractionTTas carried out by steam distillation of finely ground leaves in an apparatus developed in our laboratory ( 5 ) . The yields (volume/ volume) are reported in table 1. Each essential oil, after separation, was dried with anhydrous sodium sulfate, filtered, and sealed in glass vials under nitrogen atmosphere.
