CALEA CUNEIFOLIA"
Six reduced p-hydroxyacetophenones, a p-hydroxyvinylbenzene derivative, a chromanone, and acetylsarracinic acid were isolated from the xylopodium of Calea cuneijdia. The constitutions were elucidated by spectroscopic methods and a few chemical transformations.

INTRODUCTIONIn continuation of the phytochemical investigations of the genus Calea (Compositae) [l ] we now report the isolation and characterization of sitosterol, acetylsarracinic acid, 6-hydroxy-2,2-dimethylchroman-4-one, Zsenecionyl-4-(1-hydroxyethyl)-phenol and five new derivatives of this last substance from the hexane extract of Calea cuneifolia DC. This appears to be the first report of acetylsarracinic as a free acid in plants.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONThe spectral data (UV, IR, 'H NMR and MS) of the aromatic constituents (l-4) of the hexane extract of C. cuneifolia show very similar features. All, except 4, present IR absorption characteristics of an o-hydroxyacetophenone (v,,, 164ocm-i). The 'H NMR spectra show the trisubstituted pattern for these substances (Table 1). The major compound (la) has 'H NMR, IR, MS and [cz]~ data similar \; to those of 2-senecionyl-4-(1hydroxyethyl)-phenol\ isolated before from Ageratina altisima [2]. The obtention of acetophenone [3], diacetyl and dihydro derivatives confirmed the constitution.Compounds lb and lc have the same molecular formula (C,,H,,O In the 'H NMR spectra of Id and le this signal of H-7 is shifted downfield relative to that in la. These substances are the corresponding acetate and acetylsarracinate of la. Compound 2 presents in the 'H NMR spectrum a singlet at 1.29ppm equivalent to 6H and a singlet at 3.07ppm (2H) instead of the two methyl bands at 2.02 and 2.20 ppm and the 6.70 ppm multiplet (1H) of la. These differences fit very well with its formulation as the hydration product of la. The structure of the vinyl compound 3 was easily established by 'H NMR data.Compound 4 does not present the spectral absorptions characteristic of the senecionyl and hydroxyethyl moieties present in the spectra of the other compounds. The chroman structure was suggested by the 'H NMR spectrum. This compound has been described before as a synthetic product [4].The IR spectrum of 5 show absorptions characteristic of ester and acid functions. The strong similarity between the 'H NMR spectrum of this compound and that of the acid moiety of compound le indicated that it is acetylsarracinic acid. The other spectral data confirmed this suggestion. As far as we know, this is the first report of the occurrence of free acetylsarracinic acid.The dimeric compounds (la and lc) and the vinyl compound (3) could be artifacts. This possibility is suggested by the presence of an acidic compound (5) in the hexane extract of the xylopodium of Calea cuneifolia and by the small amounts of these compounds in addition to large amounts of la. The absence of optical activity strongly supports this probability in the case of lc.Isoprenylated acetophenones are common in species of the Compositae. Reduced acetophenones, however, have been found previously only in species of the tribes Inuleae, Heliantheae and Eupatorieae.  (~1, J = 2, 2 H) (d, J = 2, 2 Hj (d, .J = 2, 1 H) (d, J = 2, 1 H ) (d, f = 2, I H) (d, f = 2, I H) (s,2 H) 7,30 7,40 7.32 I,41 7,43 7,39 7;su 7,40 (dd,,), established by high resolution MS, UV and IR spectra but different mps, RJ on TLC and [c1],,. These observations and the slight differences in the chemical shifts of the bands in the 'H NMR spectra of these two substances could only be explained by the assumption that they are epimers. The absence of the hydroxyl bands in the 'H NMR (present in la), the fragmentation shown in the *Part II in the series "The Chemistry of Brasihan Compositae". For Part I see ref. [l 1. Based on the M.S. Thesis presented by Tania 0. Lourenqo to Universidade de Sao Paulo. Sponsored by Funda@o de Amparo a Pesquisa do Estado de SZo Paulo. t To whom correspondence should be addressed. MS and the obtention of only a phenol acetate agree with the constitution proposed for lb and lc. Compound lb has [aI? -11.6, C-7 and C-7' having therefore the same absolute configuration. lc, with [a]i4 0, is the meso compound.
la Table I. 'H NMR of aromatic constituents of C. cuncijoliu (CCI,, 60 MHz. 6, J in Hz)
