Circadian Rhythm of Anti-fungal Prenylated Chromene in Leaves of Piper aduncum
Leaves of Piper aduncum accumulate the anti-fungal chromenes methyl 2,2-dimethyl. The enzymatic formation of 2 from dimethylallyl diphosphate and 1 was investigated using cell-free extracts of the title plant. An HPLC assay for the prenylation reaction was developed and the enzyme activity measured in the protein extracts. The prenyltransferase that catalyses the transfer of the dimethylallyl group to C-2′ ′ ′ ′ ′ of 1 was soluble and required dimethylallyl diphosphate as the prenyl donor. In the leaves, the biosynthesis of the prenylated chromene 2 was time-regulated and prenyltransferase activity depended upon circadian variation. Preliminary characterisation and purification experiments on the prenyltransferase from P. aduncum have been performed.

INTRODUCTIONPiper aduncum (Piperaceae) is a shrub widely used in folklore medicine in Latin America and in the West Indies (Diaz et al., 1986;Orjala et al., 1993). In Peru it is used for the treatment of diarrhoea, in Brazil for the healing of wounds, and in Jamaica as a remedy for the common cold and for stomach ache. From a chemical standpoint, P. aduncum is characterised by its accumulation of benzoic acid and chromene derivatives. One such component, a prenylated chromene, has recently been shown to possess anti-tumour and anti-fungal activities (Moreira et al., 1998;Baldoqui et al., 1999;Lago et al., 2004). Typically, prenylated derivatives of flavonoids and isoflavonoids also exhibit significant anti-fungal activities, and such properties are apparently associated with the presence of the prenyl side chains (Harborne et al., 1976;Mizobuchi and Sato, 1984;Adesanya et al., 1986;Stevens et al., 1997). Prenyl groups can thus be considered to be important pharmacophores providing lipophilicity to the derivatised molecule.The prenyltransferases, which are responsible for the key biosynthetic step in the formation of prenyl derivatives, are of evolutionary interest and may be appropriate for further exploitation as tools for the prenylation of benzoic acid and other aromatic compounds. Whilst prenylated polyphenols are widely distributed in various families of higher plants, including the Compositae, Rutaceae, Moraceae and Cannabaceae (Barron and Ibrahim, 1996;Yamamoto et al., 1997;Seeram et al., 1998;Zuurbier et al., 1998;Asada et al., 2000), reports concerning prenyltransferases that act on aromatic substrates are still rare (Yamamoto et al., 1997;Zuurbier et al., 1998). In the present paper, the prenylation step involved in the formation of benzoic acid derivatives in P. aduncum has been studied using cell-free extracts. The enzymatic conversion of methyl 2,2-dimethyl-2H-1chromene-6-carboxylate (1) into methyl 2,2-dimethyl-8-(3′-methyl-2′-butenyl)-2H-1-chromene-6-carboxylate (2) was assessed with respect to incubation time of the reaction mixture, protein concentration, pH, temperature and concentration of substrates, and, most significantly, its association with circadian rhythm in the plant.
EXPERIMENTALReagents and standards. Acetonitrile (HPLC-grade), ascorbic acid, cysteine, EDTA, sucrose, magnesium chloride, dipotassium hydrogen phosphate, potassium dihydrogen phosphate, polyvinylpolypyrrolidone and polyethyleneglycol 4000 were purchased from Mallinckrodt (Baker, Xalostoc, Mexico). Dimethylallyl diphosphate (DMAPP) was obtained from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO, USA). Nanopure water (>18 MΩ) was produced using a Millipore (Bedford, MA, USA) purifier. The standard compounds methyl 2,2-dimethyl-2H-1chromene-6-carboxylate (1) and methyl 2,2-dimethyl-8-(3′-methyl-2′-butenyl)-2H-1-chromene-6-carboxylate (2) (Fig. 1) were isolated from Piper aduncum using methods previously described (Baldoqui et al., 1999). HPLC analyses. A Varian (Palo Alto, CA, USA) ProStar liquid chromatographic system, consisting of a model 410 auto-sampler, a model 240 quaternary pump coupled to a Varian Microsorb column (C 18 , 250 × 4.6 mm i.d.; 5 µm) and pre-column (20 × 4 mm i.d.; 5 µm), and a model 230 UV-visible photodiode array detector (PAD), was employed. Eluent consisted of water containing 0.1% acetic acid (solvent A) and acetonitrile (solvent B) in a linear gradient from 65:35 (A:B) to 20:80 in 20 min followed by isocratic elution with 20:80 for a further 15 min. The flow rate was 0.7 mL/min, and the total analytical run time was 35 min. All solvents and samples were filtered through a 0.2 µm nylon membrane before analysis. Solutions of extracts (1 mg/mL, 30 µL aliquots) were applied to the column via the automatic injector, and the column effluent was monitored from 220 to 400 nm. The characteristic retention times for 1 and 2 under these chromatographic conditions were 19.42 and 26.13 min, respectively. FPLC separations. A Pharmacia (San Pablo, CA, USA) FPLC chromatograph, with a model P-500 binary pump system coupled to a Resource Q column (6 mL), was employed. Elution was with Tris/hydrochloric acid pH 7.5 (solvent A) and solvent A containing 0.2 m sodium chloride (solvent B) initially in isocratic mode with 100:0 (A:B) for 20 min, followed by a linear gradient from 100:0 to 0:100 in 15 min at a flow rate of 1 mL/min. Plant material. Leaves of Piper aduncum L. (Piperaceae) were collected at Ripasa Reserve (Fazenda Fortaleza, Ibaté, SP, Brazil) and identified by Dr. Inês Cordeiro (Instituto de Botânica, São Paulo, SP, Brazil). A voucher specimen (Kato-57) is deposited at the Herbário do Estado 'Maria Eneyda P. Kaufmann Fidalgo' (São Paulo, SP, Brazil).
Determination of the circadian rhythm of accumulationof chromenes 1 and 2. One specimen of P. aduncum growing at Chemistry Institute had its leaves (10) collected at regular intervals of 2 h in a period of 48 h, cleaned mechanically with a cloth and freeze-dried. A sample (100 mg) of the dried and powdered leaf material (duplicate) was transferred to a centrifuge tube and extracted by sonication (20 min) with 5 mL of dichloromethane. An aliquot of the resulting extract (3 mL) was evaporated under reduced pressure, dissolved in 3 mL of methanol:water (95:5) and submitted to SPE on a C 18 cartridge eluted with an additional 3 mL of methanol:water (95:5). The eluate was dried under reduced pressure, dissolved in 2 mL of methanol and analysed by HPLC as described above. The identification of 1 and 2 was based on retention time and UV spectra in comparison with standards obtained from leaves of P. aduncum (Baldoqui et al., 1999;Lago et al., 2004).Extraction and concentration of prenyltransferase. All steps were carried out at 0-4°C. Frozen leaves (4.9 g) were ground separately with sea sand, liquid nitrogen and 50% (w/w) polyvinylpolypyrrolidone using a pestle and mortar. The frozen powders were mixed with the extraction buffer containing 0.5 m potassium phosphate buffer (pH 8.0), 10% (w/w) sucrose, 1.5% (w/v) polyethyleneglycol 4000, 200 mm ascorbic acid, 50 mm cysteine and 1 mm EDTA. After thawing, the homogenate was filtered through a Miracloth (Calbiochem, San Diego, CA, USA) filter and the filtrate (total volume 26 mL) was centrifuged twice for 30 min at 10,000 and 13,000 rpm, respectively, using a Sorvall (Englewood, NJ, USA) model RC 5C Plus centrifuge equipped with Sorvall GSA or Sorvall SS-34 rotors. The pellets and the supernatant were tested for prenyltransferase activity (see below). The pellets appeared to contain no activity and so only the supernatants were further investigated. Organic solvent precipitation of protein extracts was accomplished by adding 3 × 20 mL of acetone separately to 100 mL of sample. After each addition of 20 mL, the solution was centrifuged and the precipitate separated from the supernatant. The crude protein extracts were concentrated by ammonium sulphate precipitation. The percentage of salt added was determined according to Englard and Seifter (1990). The prenyltransferase activity left in the supernatant was desalinised in a PD-10 column (Pharmacia, San Pablo, CA, USA) and submitted to FPLC separations.Assay of prenyltransferase activity. The assay based on the conversion of 1 to 2 using protein extracts plus DMAPP (Fig. 1). Protein concentrations were determined according to Bradford (1976). Protein extracts (70 µL) were pre-incubated at 37.5°C with 200 µL of 0.1 m potassium phosphate buffer (pH 8.0) plus 26 µL of a solution of 1 (0.15 mg/mL in methanol). The reaction was initiated by the addition of 26 µL of DMAPP (10 mm in water) and the assay mixture incubated at 37.5°C for a further 40 min. After this time, the reaction was stopped by the addition of 6 m hydrochloric acid (5 µL) and ethyl acetate (265 µL), the organic layer was separated and evaporated to dryness. The residues were dissolved in 60 µL of methanol and analysed by HPLC as described above. For the determination of the cofactor requirements, an aliquot (10 µL) of a 10 mm solution of magnesium chloride was added to the assay mixture.Determination of pH and temperature optima. The pH optimum of the prenyltransferase was determined using the standard assay conditions described above but with an assay buffer of either 0.1 m potassium phosphate buffer in the pH range 7.2-8.6 or 0.1 m Trishydrochloric acid in the pH range 7.2-8.0. In order to determine the temperature optimum for the reaction, assays were conducted at temperatures between 20 and 50°C under the standard conditions described above.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Detection of prenyltransferase activity in leaves of Piper aduncumA crude cell-free extract prepared from leaves of P. aduncum was incubated with the chromene 1, DMAPP and magnesium chloride in potassium phosphate buffer (pH 8.0) for 40 min at 37.5°C. After the termination of the reaction with hydrochloric acid, the reaction mixture was extracted with ethyl acetate and analysed by reversed-phase HPLC-PAD. The resulting chromatogram (Fig. 2) presented a peak (2) whose retention time and UV absorption data were in complete agreement with those of standard methyl 2,2-dimethyl-8-(3′-methyl-2′-butenyl)-2H-1-chromene-6-carboxylate (2). The identity of the compound associated with this peak was confirmed by direct comparison with an authentic sample of 2 (Baldoqui et al., 1999). Under the assay conditions studied, the enzymatic formation of 2 appeared to reach a maximum at ca. 40 min of reaction time [Fig. 4(A)]. The reaction was dependent on the presence of active enzyme preparation, substrates 1 and DMAPP, and Mg 2+ as cofactor.
Prenyltransferase activity and circadian variationA preliminary evaluation of the prenyltransferase associated with the formation of chromene 2 indicated a wide range of enzymatic activity in the samples tested. It was hence of interest to ascertain whether the formation of 2 in leaves was regulated according on a circadian basis or not. Thus, leaves of P. aduncum were harvested every 2 h during a period of 48 h in order to evaluate the content of chromenes 1 and 2 in a circadian basis [Fig. 3(A)]. Each sampling was individually submitted to the determination of chromenes by HPLC, which indicated a  maxima level for both compounds 6:00 a.m. [Fig. 3(A)]. Next, the variation in total prenyltransferase activity was determined as well and a maximum conversion of 1 into 2 [Fig. 3(B)] is in complete agreement with the observation of the highest accumulation of 2 during the early morning period. Based upon these results, leaves collected at 6:00 a.m. were used for the additional studies concerning prenyltransferase activity.
Properties of prenyltransferase from leaves of P. aduncumHaving established the authenticity of the enzymatic transformation, an analysis of the time course of the reaction was carried out [Fig. 4(A)]. Under the assay conditions studied, the formation of 2 appeared to reach a maximum level within 40 min. Assays were conducted using buffers at various pH values ranging from 7.2 to 8.6 [Fig. 4(B)], and the optimum pH for the reaction was determined to be between pH 8.0 and 8.6. The temperature dependence of the reaction in 0.1 m potassium phosphate buffer at pH 8.0 was also investigated and maximum activity was observed between 35 and 38°C [Fig. 4(C)]. In Fig. 4(D) and (E) the concentrations of the substrates 1 and DMAPP, respectively, were varied whilst all other conditions were maintained at optimal levels during the assays. The reactions were linear up to ca. 10 mmol of DMAPP and 0.42 mmol of 1.
Concentration of prenyltransferase activity and sub-cellular localizationThe prenyltransferase activity, as determined by conversion of 1 to 2 in the crude extracts could be concentrated by acetone (60-80% saturation) precipitation. Additionally, the precipitation of protein with ammonium sulphate (20-80% saturation) left a supernatant which retained most of the prenyltransferase activity (Fig. 5).The supernatant fraction thus obtained was desalinized and then fractionated by FPLC using a Resource Q cation exchange column yielding a fraction with higher prenyltransferase activity.The majority of the prenylating activity (>90%) was detected in the soluble fraction and not in the microsomal fraction of the leaf protein extract, indicating that the enzyme involved was not membrane-bound. However, most prenyltransferases capable of catalysing similar reactions associated with the biosynthesis of secondary metabolites are not soluble (Yamamoto et al., 1997). The only reported example of such an enzyme being present in a soluble fraction was associated with the C-prenylation of aromatic intermediates in the biosynthesis of bitter acids in Humulus lupulus (Zuurbier et al., 1998).Figure 1 .1Figure 1. Conversion of methyl 2,2-dimethyl-2H-1-chromene-6carboxylate (1) into methyl 2,2-dimethyl-8-(3′-methyl-2′-butenyl)-2H-1-chromene-6-carboxylate (2) by an enzyme fraction from leaves of Piper aduncum using dimethylallyl pyrophosphate (DMPP) as cofactor.
Figure 2 .Figure 3 .23Figure 2. Typical HPLC chromatogram obtained from the assay of prenyltransferase activity in a protein extract obtained from leaves of P. aduncum: 1 and DMAPP were used as substrates, and 2 was identified as the prenylated product. (For chromatographic conditions see the Experimental section.)
Figure 4 .4Figure 4. Characterisation of the prenyltransferase reaction showing (A) the time-course of formation of the chromene 2 catalysed by the prenyltransferase from leaves of P. aduncum, (B) the pH optimum of the reaction using potassium phosphate and Tris-hydrochloride buffers at various pH values, (C) the temperature optimum of the reaction in 0.1 M potassium phosphate buffer at pH 8.0, and (D and E) the optimal concentrations of the substrates 1 and DMAPP, respectively, with other conditions maintained at optimal levels.
Figure 5 .5Figure 5. Relative prenyltransferase activity (conversion of 1 to 2) after preliminary protein purification steps: (a) crude fraction depleted of microsomes; (b) precipitated fraction with acetone (60-80%); (c) proteins soluble in ammonium sulphate (80%); (d) step (c) and then ion exchange chromatography. The initial crude extract was obtained from leaves of P. aduncum collected at 6:00 a.m.
