ISOFLAVONOIDS FROM CYCLOLOBIUM SPECIES*
Key WordIndex-Cyc[olobium chusseni; Cyclolobium uecchii; Leguminosae; isoflavans; isoflavanquinonea Abstract-_i3R)-Claussequinone (7-hydroxy-4'-methoxyisoflavanquinone) is the principal constituent of Cyclolobium clausseni Benth. and C. vecchii A. Samp. extracts. C. clausseni contains additionally (3R)mucroquinone (7-hydroxy-8,4'-dimethoxyisoflavanquinone), (3R)-vestitol (7,2'-dihydroxy-4'-methoxyisoflavan), (3R)-cc,a-dimethylallylcyclolobin [IS'-(1,l -dimethylallyl)-7,3',4'-trihydroxy-Y-methoxyisoflavan], biscyclolobin, 3'-hydroxyformononetin and isoliquiritigenin. The structural proposals for vestitol and claussequinone were confirmed by synthesis.

and Cyclolobium (Leguminosae-Lotoideae) are morphologically closely related [3]. Previous work on 25 Dalbergiu and Machaerium species has shown that the affinities of the two genera extend to their chemical composition [4]. Only a few Cyclolobium species are known, all of very restricted geographical distribution; C. clausseni Benth., trivial name sucupira carim, and C. vecchii A. Samp. occur in the State of Minas Gerais.The benzene extracts of the trunk wood of both species contain an orange pigment (la), which gave a monoacetate (lb) and was named claussequinone after it was found that the compound is amenable to reduction to a quinol which, upon 'acetylation, gives a triacetate (2a). From the heartwood extract of C. duussetzi, available in comparatively much larger quantity, an additional pigment was isolated. This was recognised as (3R)-mucroquinone (lc) by spectral data and direct comparison with (3S)-mucroquinone ex M. tnucromdatutnMart. [I 1, 131. Again, only the antipodal ORD curves of both derivatives were not coincident.A priori, it would seem reasonable to consider la and lc artifacts. produced by oxidation respectively of 2e and 2f. Although at least one of the required precursors. namely (3R)-vestitol (2e), was isolated from the C. c~lausseni extract. the presence of yellow pigments is consistent with the bright colour of the wood samples. (3K)-Vestitol was identified by comparison with the synthetic (t)-7,2'-dihydr oxy-4'-methoxyisoflavan (2e), described above, as well as with natural (3S)-vestitol, differing from these products in the appropriate manner only with respect to the ORD curves.Two additional isoflavan derivatives were obtained from the same source. They were characterized as such through inspection of their IR and UV spectra. The PMR spectrum of 4 confirmed this proposal through the characteristic signals due to the 5 protons of the heterocycle and revealed substitution by an r,r-dimethylallyl group. MS evidence shows that this. together with 2 hydroxyls and 1 methoxyl, can only be placed on ring B (rctro-Diels--Alder fragment: nl/r 234). Ring A is monohydroxylated (retro-Diels-Alder fragment: ttzic 122) as shown in 4, since a mm split doublet is located at the high field PMR limit (Z 3.63. d J 2.0 Hz) of the 3-proton system and must thus keep ortho-relations to two oxifunctions. The lone aromatic proton of ring B (z 3.39, s) can only be placed pwa (or ortho) mm, meta to the oxi-functions. The ortho-alternatives (5, 6), however, can be safely disregarded. The hydroxyls. which form a catechol system (H3B03 UV shift), are highly hindered, derivatization of the compound being very difficult, and must both be vicinal to substituents as in 4. Furthermore, the pyridine induced solvent shift [14] of the ring B aromatic proton signal is very weak. The 3Rconfiguration can be attributed to x.r-dimethyIaIlylcyclolobin (4) upon comparison of its ORD curve with published data [13].Insolubility in the usual solvents prevented the measurement of a reasonable PMR spectrum for the additional isoflavan. The MS, however, showed that this must be a dehydrative dimer based on cyclolobin such as 7. The molecular ion suffers two consecutive losses of ring-A fragments leading to IIn/r-122]+' and [M-244]+. ions.The biosynthesis of isoflavan derivatives should involve pterocarpan, isoflavone and chalcone intermediates [4], and the two latter classes are indeed represented in C. claus.wtzi through 7,3'dihydroxy-4'-methoxyisoflavone (3g) and isoliquiritigenin. The chalcone was previously isolated from Dalhergia and Machuwiuttt species [ 131 and identified by direct comparison with an authentic sample. The isoflavone (3g) gave a diacetate, which contributed to the spectral determination of its structure, and the known dimethyl ether (cabreuvin, 3c) [lS], identified by direct comparison with an authentic sample. 3'-Hydroxyformononetin (3g) was isolated previously from Pterocarpus dalbergioides [16] and subsequently also from Machaerium vestitum Vog., Myroxylon peruiferum L.f. and M. balsamum (L.) Harms [17]. \ "IThe structural * Part LII in the series "The Chemistry of Brazilian Leguminosae". For Part LI see Ref. 1; for a Preliminary Communication see Ref. 2. Taken from parts of the M.S. theses presented by T.M.M.G. and S.A.P. to the Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais (1974). Sponsored by Ministirio do Planejamento (FINEP contract FNDCT N" 154/C.T.), Conselho National de Pesquisas and Conselho de Pesquisas da Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais. analysis, involving UV, IR, PMR and MS, was confirmed by synthesis. 2,4-Dimethoxyphenylacetic acid [IS], obtained by the Wilgerodt reaction [6] from 2,4-dimethoxyacetophenone, was condensed with resorcinol in CHCl,/BF, [7] to 2,4_dihydroxyphenyl 2,4-dimethoxybenzyl ketone [S]. Application of the orthoformate method [7] to this deoxybenzoin led to 7-hydroxy-2',4'-dimethoxyisoflavone (3a) [S], which was selectively demethylated by AlCl, in C,HsN02 [9] to 7,2'-dihydroxy-4'-methoxyisoflavone (3b) [S]. The catalytic reduction of isoflavans is not uniformly successful [lo] and it was deemed necessary to test its applicability on several common isoflavones @c-f). In these model reactions the hitherto undescribed (+)-7,3',4'-trimethoxy-(2b), (+ )-7-hydroxy-6,4'-dimethoxy-(2~) and (+ )-7-hydroxy-4'-methoxy-(2d) isoflavans were prepared. Finally also the reduction of 7,2'dihydroxy-4'-methoxyisoflavone was attempted, leading without difficulty to (f )-7,2'-dihydroxy-4'-methoxyisoflavan (2e) whose oxidation with Fremy's salt gave a compound, identical in all 2495 respects with natural claussequinone (la), except for mp and optical activity. The synthetic material was, of course, inactive, while natural claussequinone showed a positive Cotton effect. (3S)-Claussequinone (la). obtained by CrO,/AcOH oxidation of (+)-7,2'-dihydroxy-4'-methoxyisoflavan, the (3S)-vestitol (2e) of D. mriahilis Vog. [ 1 l] D. cmstoplzylluttz (L.) Taub. [ 121 and M. wstitutn Vog, [ll]. showed a negative Cotton effect [13]. The (3R)-configuration must, consequently, correspond to the claussequinone (la) from CJK&~Ohiutn.
EXPERIMENTALIsolation of the constituents of Cyclolobium clausseni. The trunk wood of a specimen collkcteh in the vicinity of Pedro Leopoldo, Minas Gerais, and identified bv the botanist A. Pereira Duarte, was separated into bark, heartwood and softwood. The ground heartwood (3.4 kg) was extracted successively with C,H, and EtOH. The C&H, extract C 160 !zj was " "
