2552  PHYTOCHEMICAL REPORTS  Phytochemistry,  1971, Vol. 10, p. 2552. Pergamon Press.  Printed in England.  ANTHOCYANIN  PIGMENTS  IN BEAN  SEEDLINGS  CONSTANCE  NOZZOLILLO  Department  of Biology, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Canada  (Received  18 January 1971, in revised form 26 March 1971)  Abstract-Delphinidin  3-glucoside is the major pigment in hypocotyls of mung bean seedlings; malvidin  and pelargonidin glycosides are present in lesser amounts. Malvidin 3,5-diglucoside is predominant  in seedling  hypocotyls of two varieties of bush bean and in stems of runner bean seedlings.  Plants. Red-pigmented  seedlings  of mung bean (Phafeolus  aureus Roxb.);  Royalty  and  (Black Wax cultivars  of bush bean P. vulgaris L.); and Hammond’s  Dwarf runner  bean  (P. coccineus L.).  Previous work. Effect of aniline  on pigmentation  of mung bean.’  Nature  of pigments  in  pods, petals, and seed coats of bush and runner  bean2 and in cotyledons  of mung bean.3  Present work. Nature  of pigments  in mung bean, and effect of aniline on pigmentation  in  bush and runner  bean and nature  of pigments  in these two species.  Mung bean. Hypocotyls  of 24  week old seedlings  grown as before’ excised and extrac-  ted with MeOH-  % HCI. After chromatographic  separation,  major pigment  was identified  as delphinidin  3-glucoside  by hydrolysis  and spectral  and chromatographic  comparison  with authentic  material.  Traces of malvidin  and pelargonidin  glycosides  were also detected.  Bush bean and runner bean. As with mung bean,l  colour  development  of the seedlings  was reduced  following  imbibition  of 0.01 M aniline solution,  that of Royalty  by 50per cent,  that of Black Wax by 75 per cent. Runner  beans were even more sensitive,  pigmentation  in  the stem being 90 per cent reduced  by imbibition  of 0.01 M aniline.  Extracts  of all three  seedlings  yielded  the same major  pigment,  identified  by co-chromatography  as malvidin  3$diglucoside  (absorption  max. 533 nm; hydrolysis  gave malvidin  3-glucoside,  malvidin  and glucose).  1 C. NOZZOLILLO, Phytochemistry  10, 1011 (1971).  ’ J. B. HARBORNE, Comparative  Biochemistry  of the Flavonoids.  Academic Press, London and New York  (1967).  3 J. T. PROCTOR, Dim. Abstr.  31, 10-B (1970).  Phytochemistry, 1971, Vol. 10, pp. 2552 to 2553. Pergamon Press. Printed in England.  EXTRACTIVES  OF TIPUANA  TZPU*  A. BRAGA  DE OLIVEIRA,~  0.  R. GOTTLIEB and M. E. LEITE DE ALMEIDA  Escola de Pbs-Gradua@o,  Universidade  Federal Rural do Rio de Janeiro, c.p. 25, ZC-00,  Brazil  (Received  20 October  1970)  Abstract-Stearic  acid, p-sitosterol and formononetin  were isolated from Tipuuna tipu (Benth.) 0. Kuntze.  Acknowledgement-The  authors wish to thank the Conselho National  de Pesquisas, Brazil for financial  support.  * Part XXXI in the series “The Chemistry of Brazilian Leguminosae”.  For part XXX see Ref. 1.  t Present address: Instituto de Ci&ncias Exatas, Universidade  Federal de Minas Gerais, Be10 Horizonte,  Brazil.  hWTOCHEMICAL  REPORTS  2553  Plant. Tipuuna tipu (Benth.) 0. Kuntze, trivial name, ‘tip6’.  Source. Belo Horizonte, Brasil, where the species is used for street ornamentation.  Trunk-wood. The benzene extract (5g, O-5 %) was chromatographed  on a silica column.  The fractions eluted with hexane-benzene  1: 2 yielded initially stearic acid (3 mg) and  subsequently /3-sitosterol (30 mg). The fractions eluted with CHC& afforded formono-  netin (10 mg). The compounds were identified by direct comparison (co-chromatography,  mixed m.ps and i.r. spectra) with authentic samples.  Root. The benzene extract of root material yielded the same compounds.  1 H. MARTINS, 0. R. GOTIZIEB and M. TAVEIRA MAGALH~, Phyrochem. lo,1379  (1971).  Phytochemistry.  1971, Vol. 10, pp. 2553 to 2554. Pergamon Press. Printed in England  RANUNCULACEAE  FLAVON-C- UND O-GLYKOSIDE  IN THALZCTRUM-ARTEN*  H. WAGNER und M. A. IYENGAR  Institut fiir Pharmazeutische  Arzneimittellehre,  der Universitiit Miinchen  und  J. L. BEAL  College of Pharmacy, Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio  (Eingegumm 26 M&z 1971)  Zusammenfassung-Aus  den oberirdischen  Teilen dreier Thalictrum-Arten wurden die Flavon-C-glykoside  Vitexin, Saponaretin,  Orientin und Iso-Orientin  sowie die Flavon-0-glykoside  Quercetin-3-rutinosid  und  K&mpferol-3-rhamnoglucosid  isoliert bzw. chromatographisch  nachgewiesen.  Abstract-From  the aerial parts of three Thalictrum species the flavone-C-glycosides  vitexin, saponaretin,  orientin and Iso-orientin and the flavone-0-glycosides  quercetin-3-rutinoside  and kaempferol-3-rhamnogluco-  side were isolated or identified chromatographically.  Untersuchte PJanzenarten und Herkunft  Thalictrum minus L., T. minus L. Rasse B,t T. dasycarpum L., T. rugosum AIT. kulti-  viert im Arzneimittelgarten  des College of Pharmacy, Ohio State University, Columbus,  Ohio, Ernte 1969.  Bisherige Isolierungen  1. Vorwiegend Alkaloide der mono- und bis-Benzylisochinolin-Aporphin-Reihe  (siehe  Literaturzusammenstellung  bei Doskotch  et al.‘).  2. Cyanogene Glykoside in T. aquilegifolium.2  * VIII. Mitteilung iiber Flavon-C-glykoside.  t The plants were identified by Dr. Bernard Boivin, Botanist, Central Experimental  Farm, Plant Res-  earch Institute,  Department  of Agriculture,  Ottawa, Ontario,  Canada.  Dr. Boivin classified the plants  designated race B to be a chemical race of Thalictrum minus,  * R. W. DOSKOTOCH, P. L. SCHIFF und .I. L. BEAL, Alkaloide von Thalictrum XI, Lloydia 32,29 (1969).  2 D. SHARPLES und I. R. STOKER, Phytochem. 8, 597 (1969).  